The Project Gutenberg EBook of London and Its Environs Described, Vol. 4
(of 6), by Anonymous

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of
the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org.  If you are not located in the United States, you'll have
to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this ebook.

Title: London and Its Environs Described, Vol. 4 (of 6)
       Containing an Account of whatever is most remarkable for
       Grandeur, Elegance, Curiosity or Use

Author: Anonymous

Release Date: January 7, 2020 [EBook #61127]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK LONDON AND ITS ENVIRONS, VOL 4 ***




Produced by Richard Tonsing and The Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by The
Internet Archive)









                                 LONDON
                                AND ITS
                                ENVIRONS
                               DESCRIBED.
                                VOL. IV.




                                 LONDON
                                AND ITS
                                ENVIRONS
                               DESCRIBED.

                               CONTAINING

   An Account of whatever is most remarkable for GRANDEUR, ELEGANCE,
                           CURIOSITY or USE,

         In the CITY and in the COUNTRY Twenty Miles round it.

                           COMPREHENDING ALSO

 Whatever is most material in the History and Antiquities of this great
                              Metropolis.

 Decorated and illustrated with a great Number of Views in Perspective,
    engraved from original Drawings, taken on purpose for this Work.

Together with a PLAN of LONDON, A Map of the ENVIRONS, and several other
                              useful CUTS.

                                VOL. IV.


                                LONDON:
               Printed by R. and J. DODSLEY in Pall-Mall.

                               M DCC LXI.

[Illustration: A New and Correct PLAN of LONDON, WESTMINSTER and
SOUTHWARK, _with several Additional Improvements, not in any former
Survey._]




                                 LONDON
                                AND ITS
                                ENVIRONS
                             DESCRIBED, &c.


LONDON, the metropolis of Great Britain, and one of the largest and
richest cities upon earth, is of such antiquity that it is impossible to
give any certain account of its origin. It probably existed in the time
of the ancient Britons, before the art of writing was brought into
England, and when there were no other monuments of ancient facts, than
what were found in the songs of the bards, which were preserved only by
memory.

It would be ridiculous therefore to lay any stress on the fabulous tales
of Geffry of Monmouth, who pretends that it was founded by Brutus, the
second nephew of the famous Æneas, and called _Trinovantum_, or New
Troy, and that it was at length walled by King Lud, when it obtained the
name of _Caer Lud_, or _Lud’s Town_. Upon which suppositions some of our
later historians have had the weakness to compute, that it had its
origin 1107 years before the birth of Christ; 600 years before the fall
of the Assyrian empire by the death of Belshazzar, and 350 before the
building of Rome.

But to leave these fabulous tales. Camden supposes that this city
derived the name of London from the British words _Llhwn_ a wood, and
_Dinas_ a town; by which etymology of the word, London signifies _a town
in a wood_: this exactly agrees with the manner in which the Britons
formed their towns, by building them in the midst of woods, and fencing
them with trees cut down: but lest this derivation should not please,
the same learned writer gives another, from the British word _Lhong_, a
ship, and _Dinas_ a city, and then the word London will signify a city
or harbour for ships: and indeed it has been supposed by many learned
authors, that before Cæsar’s time London was the ancient emporium or
mart of the British trade with the Phœnicians, Greeks and Gauls.

London had however no buildings either of brick or stone, till it was
inhabited by the Romans; for the dwellings of the Britons were only huts
formed of twigs wattled together; however, Tacitus observes, that in the
year 26, Londinum was very famous for the multitude of its merchants,
and the greatness of its traffic; but soon after Suetonius abandoned the
city to the fury of Boadicea, because it was too large to be defended by
his little army of 10,000 Romans, which is certainly a proof of its
being even then of a considerable extent. That British Princess however
burnt this great city, and put all the inhabitants to the sword.

London soon recovered from this dreadful catastrophe, and in a few years
increased so much in the number of its inhabitants, its trade and
buildings, that _Herodian_, in the life of the Emperor Severus, calls it
a great and wealthy city, and about this time it changed the name of
_Londinum_, for that of _Augusta_; probably from its being the capital
of the British dominions, and was made a prefecture by the Romans, in
imitation of Rome itself: but it soon after changed the name of Augusta
for that of _Caer-Llundain_.

It will not be improper here to observe, that a dispute has arisen about
the situation of this city in these early times; the Rev. and learned
Dr. Gale, Dean of York, and Mr. Salmon, having offered many arguments to
prove that it was a Roman station erected in St. George’s Fields, to
secure their conquests on that side the river, before they reduced the
Trinobantines; particularly from the great quantities of Roman
antiquities found in St. George’s Fields; from the name of Cyningston,
or Kennington, which Dr. Gale supposes was an ancient town and castle
belonging to the Kings of England, and therefore probably a Roman
station, because the Saxons generally used to settle in such places; and
from the authority of Ptolemy, who has placed London on the south side
of the Thames. In answer to these arguments, it has been very justly
observed by Mr. Maitland, that the Romans were too wise to make use of
so noisome and unhealthful a place for a station, as St. George’s Fields
then was, from their being overflowed by every spring tide; as they must
have been before the river was confined by artificial banks, and before
the building of London bridge, where, upon an ordinary spring tide, the
water rises upwards of nineteen inches higher on the east side than on
the west: that, if the antiquities discovered are any proof, above
twenty times the quantity of Roman antiquities have been found on the
north side of the river. With respect to the argument produced from the
name of Kennington, the learned Mr. Woodward observes, that the Kings of
England were, from our oldest notices of things, intitled to all such
lands as were gained from the sea, or from such rivers as ebbed and
flowed; and that with respect to the authority of Ptolemy, he had not
only misplaced several other towns in Britain, but in countries much
nearer to him.

The time when the city wall was first erected, is very uncertain, some
authors ascribing this work to Constantine the Great, and others to his
mother Helena; but Mr. Maitland brings several arguments to prove, that
it was erected by Valentinian, about the year 368, and that it entirely
surrounded the city, to secure it from being invaded by water as well as
by land.

This wall was composed alternately of layers of flat Roman brick, and
rag stones, and had many lofty towers. Those on the land side were
fifteen in number. The remains of one of these is still to be seen in
Shoemaker row, fronting the passage into Duke’s Place; and there is
another a little nearer Aldgate, twenty-one feet high. From the remains
of the Roman work in the city wall, Mr. Maitland supposes, that, at the
time of its erection, it was twenty-two feet in height, and that of the
towers about forty feet. See LONDON WALL.

During the Saxon heptarchy, London was the metropolis of the kingdom of
the East Saxons, and was then, as we are told by Bede, a princely
mart-town, governed by a magistrate called a Portreve, that is, a
governor or guardian of a port. We find this city then first called
London-Byrig, which they soon after changed into Lunden-Ceaster,
Lunden-Wye, Lundenne, Lunden-Berk, or Lunden-Burgh. At length Augustine
the Monk, having introduced christianity into England, in the year 400,
he was made Archbishop of Canterbury, when he ordained Mellitus bishop
of the East Saxons, who had a church erected for him in this city by
Ethelbert, King of Kent. Thus London first became the seat of a bishop;
but this prelate was afterwards expelled, and paganism again for some
time publicly established.

The history of the heptarchy is so very defective, that no mention is
made of this city from the year 616, to that of 764. After this last
period we find that London frequently suffered by fires, and was twice
plundered by the Danes; the last time they transported an army in 350
ships up the Thames, and landing near London, soon reduced and plundered
it; when looking upon it as a convenient fortress, whence they might at
pleasure invade the kingdom of Wessex, made it a place of arms, and left
in it a considerable garrison; but the wise and brave Alfred recovered
the city, drove out the invaders, and then not only repaired the wall
and towers, but embellished the city with additional buildings. But we
have no account of the nature of the buildings or the edifices erected,
only that in the year 961, there were but few houses within the city
walls, and those irregularly dispersed; most of them being without
Ludgate, so that Canterbury, York, and other places, contained more
houses than London. The city having no bridge, the citizens cross’d the
Thames by means of ferries.

But between the years 993, and 1016, a wooden bridge was erected. This
great work was performed in the reign of Ethelred, and in the last
mentioned year, Canute King of Denmark sailing up the river, in order to
plunder the city, and finding that he could not pass the bridge with his
ships, caused a canal to be cut through the marshes on the south side of
the river, which probably began at the place now called Dockhead, and
extending in a semicircle by Margaret’s Hill, entered the Thames about
St. Saviour’s Dock, a little above the bridge. This work being
accomplished, Canute brought his ships to the west of London bridge, and
attacked the city on all sides; however the citizens exerting themselves
with extraordinary bravery, he was repulsed with considerable loss, and
obliged to raise the siege. Yet he afterwards renewed it with greater
vigour than before, but with no better success. At last a peace was
concluded between King Edmund and Canute, by which the kingdom was
divided between them, when Mercia, of which London was the capital,
falling to Canute’s share, the city submitted to him; and Edmund dying a
few months after, Canute summoned a parliament to meet in London, who
chose that prince sole monarch of England.

Canute now, resolving to win the hearts of his new subjects, disbanded
his army, and threw himself entirely upon the affections of the English,
at which the above parliament were so pleased, that they granted him
83,000l. a prodigious sum at that time! for, according to the price of
land and provisions then, it must have been equal to nine millions at
present; and of this immense sum, London alone raised 11,000l. which is
a convincing proof of the opulence of the city, since it must be
possessed of above one seventh part of the wealth of the whole kingdom.

But we are not writing a history of England, but of its capital, we
shall therefore pass over the following reigns, till we come to the
invasion of William the Conqueror, who laid Southwark in ashes; but the
Londoners afterwards submitting to him, he, in the year 1067, granted
them his first charter in their own language, which consists of little
more than four lines, beautifully written in the Saxon character on a
slip of parchment, six inches long, and one broad, and is still
preserved in the city archives.

In 1077 happened the greatest casual fire, that till this time ever
befel the city, by which the greatest part of it was laid in ashes; and
about two years after, the Conqueror beginning to suspect the fidelity
of his subjects, caused the present square tower of London to be
erected, to keep them in awe. See the TOWER OF LONDON.

In this reign were several other dreadful fires, and London bridge was
in 1091 carried away by a land flood; but a few years after another
wooden bridge was built in its room. In 1099 a high flood caused the
Thames to overflow its banks, by which a great number of villages were
laid under water, and many of their inhabitants drowned: at this time
part of the lands belonging to Godwin Earl of Kent, were swallowed up by
the sea, and are now denominated Goodwin’s Sands; and this being a reign
of prodigies, there happened fifteen years after such a defect of water
in the river Thames, that numbers of people crossed not only above and
below London bridge, but even through some of the arches, without
wetting their feet.

We have already mentioned the first charter granted by William the
Conqueror to the city; he afterwards granted them another; but London
obtained one much more extensive from Henry I. by which the citizens not
only had their ancient customs and immunities confirmed, but the county
of Middlesex added to their jurisdiction, on paying the quit rent of
300l. a year; with a power of appointing not only a Sheriff but a
Justiciary from among themselves. This was granted to prevent that
county’s being any longer an asylum for bankrupts, and fraudulent
persons, who having deserted London with the goods and effects of their
creditors, lived there in open defiance of those they had injured.

By this charter the citizens were allowed the privilege of not being
compelled to plead without the walls of the city, and excused from
paying scot, lot, and danegelt, duties payable to the King by all his
other subjects. The city was not to be amerced for the escape of a
murderer; nor any citizen, when accused of a crime, be obliged to
vindicate his innocence by a duel. They were exempted from paying toll
in fairs or markets in any part of the kingdom; and if any was exacted,
they might make reprisals in London, upon the inhabitants of the town
where it was exacted, &c.

Before the grant of this charter, London seems to have been entirely
subject to the arbitrary will of the King. But the liberties of the
citizens being now guarded by so strong a fence, they endeavoured to
secure their customs by converting them into written laws; and the
several bodies professing the arts and mysteries of trade and
manufacture, which had hitherto been kept up by prescription only, were
now strengthened by being formed into established companies. The King
however reserved to himself the power of appointing the Portreve, or
chief officer of the city.

Upon the death of Henry I. the citizens assisted King Stephen in his
endeavours to obtain the crown, and in 1135 received him into the city;
but the next year, a dreadful fire laid the greatest part of the city in
ashes; for according to Mr. Stow, it began near London Stone, and
consumed all the buildings east to Aldgate, and west to St. Erkenwald’s
shrine in St. Paul’s cathedral; both of which it destroyed, together
with London bridge, which was then of wood.

In the year 1139, the citizens purchased of King Stephen, for an hundred
marks of silver, the right of chusing their own Sheriffs; but that
prince being soon after defeated and taken prisoner by the Empress
Matilda, the daughter of Henry I. she resolved to be revenged on the
citizens, for the assistance they had given to that usurper; and
therefore, entering into a convention with Geffrey, Earl of Essex, she
granted him all the possessions and places which either his grandfather,
father, or himself had held of the crown, among which were the
sheriffwicks of London and Middlesex: and also the office of Judiciary
of the city and county, so that no person could hold pleas in either,
without his permission. This compact was executed with the greatest
solemnity; and thus the citizens were divested of some of their most
valuable privileges.

The citizens soon after humbly entreated Matilda to re-establish the
laws of King Edward the Confessor, which had been confirmed to them by
the Conqueror’s charter, and to ease them of their insupportable taxes:
but instead of granting either of these requests, she, with a disdainful
countenance, told them, that since they had assisted her enemy to the
utmost of their power, they were to expect no favour from her.

From this haughty answer, they concluded that they had no other
treatment to expect from this imperious Princess, than that of slaves.
To prevent this, it was resolved, to seize her person; she however
escaped; but the populace plundered her palace; after which Stephen was
restored, and she compelled to fly the kingdom.

King Henry II. some years after, granted the citizens a charter, by
which he confirmed their liberties and immunities.

The 2d of September 1189, the day preceding the coronation of Richard I.
surnamed Coeur de Lyon, was remarkable for the dreadful massacre of the
Jews in this city. Intimation was given to that people not to appear at
the ceremony; but many endeavouring to satisfy their curiosity, by
carrying presents to the King, attempted to get into the abbey church of
St. Peter’s Westminster: but being repulsed by his Majesty’s domestics,
a rumour spread among the populace, that the King had given orders for
the entire destruction of that people. Upon which the mob, barbarously
falling upon these poor defenceless wretches, murdered all who fell in
their way, and then hastening to the city, with a more than diabolical
fury massacred all they could find, and then plundered and burnt their
houses. However, the next day, the wicked ringleaders of these horrid
barbarities were seized, and immediately hanged.

In the year 1197, the citizens purchased of King Richard a charter, for
15,000 marks, by which they were impowered to remove all wears out of
the river Thames, and the King resigned all his right to the annual
duties arising from them. This is the first charter from which the city
claims its jurisdiction and conservacy of that river.

In the next reign the citizens obtained several charters from King John,
by which this and all their other privileges were confirmed: and in the
year 1207, Henry Fitz-Alwyn took the title of Mayor, instead of Custos
and Bailiff, under which names he had held that dignity for twenty years
successively.

In the year 1211, the citizens, as an additional security, began to
encompass the wall with a deep ditch 200 feet wide; a work in which a
vast number of hands was employed. The same year London bridge was
consumed by a dreadful fire.

In the beginning of the reign of King Henry III. the city obtained from
that Prince five charters, on condition of paying him a fifteenth of
their personal estates, by which all their former privileges were
confirmed, and some others added. But these were only made to be broken;
for this perfidious Monarch frequently extorted money from the citizens,
and upon the slightest pretences imprisoned the Mayor and Sheriffs. He
seized the charters he had granted, and made the citizens purchase new
ones; and in the whole of his behaviour acted like a sharper, void of
every principle of honour and justice, or the least regard to his word,
his promises, or his oaths.

In this reign the forest of Middlesex being disforested, the citizens
obtained an opportunity of purchasing land, and building houses upon it,
by which the suburbs of the city were greatly increased, and soon
enlarged to a considerable extent without the walls, though all the
ground within them was far from being converted into regular streets.

It will not be unentertaining if we give a description of the city as it
appeared about this time. The houses were mostly built of wood, and
thatched with straw or reeds, which was the occasion of very frequent
fires; and the city was supplied with water by men who brought it in
carriages from the Thames, and from the brooks which ran through many of
the principal streets. Thus the river of Wells, so called from many
springs or wells uniting to supply its stream, arose in the north west
part of the city, and ran into Fleet Ditch, at the bottom of Holborn
hill. This small river, or brook, supplied several water mills, and at
length from thence obtained the name of Turnmill Brook.

The Olborn, or Holborn, which arose where Middle row now stands, and
flowed down the hill, also fell into Fleet Ditch; and a few houses on
its banks were called a village, and distinguished by the name of this
rivulet. While the Fleet ran down Fleet street, and also fell into Fleet
Ditch.

Wall brook entered the city through the wall between Bishopsgate and
Moorgate, and after many turnings emptied itself into the Thames at
Dowgate.

The brook Langbourn rose near the east end of Fenchurch street, where
mixing with the soil, it rendered it marshy; but ran from thence with a
swift current to Sherborne lane, and then dividing into several rills,
was lost in the Wall brook on Dowgate hill.

The springs from whence all these streams arose were pretty numerous,
and several of them at their source formed deep ponds; particularly
there was a large pond in Smithfield, supplied by its own spring; and
near Cripplegate a deep and dangerous pool, formed by Crowder’s Well.

At length the citizens being deprived of their usual supplies of water
from the above brooks, by the encroachments of buildings, and other
ways, water was brought from six springs in the town of Tyburn, by a
leaden pipe of a six-inch bore, which was made to supply leaden cisterns
castellated with stone. The first and largest of these conduits was
erected in West-cheap, in the year 1285, and afterwards the number of
these conduits were increased to about twenty. Mr. Stow informs us, that
it was customary for the Lord Mayor, accompanied by the Aldermen, and
principal citizens on horseback, to visit the heads from whence the
conduits were supplied, on the 18th of September, when they hunted a
hare before dinner, and a fox after it, in the fields beyond St.
Giles’s.

About this time the city was divided into twenty four wards, under the
government of the Aldermen; and each ward chose some of the inhabitants
as Common Council men, who were sworn into their office; these were to
be consulted by the Aldermen, and their advice followed, in all public
affairs relating to the city.

The above regulation was made in the reign of King Edward I. who also
granted the citizens a charter, by which he confirmed all their ancient
privileges. Some years before their receiving this favour, the Lord
Treasurer summoned the Mayor, Aldermen, and citizens, to attend him in
the Tower, to give an account how the peace of the city had been kept;
but Gregory Rockesley, the Mayor, resolving not to attend in that
quality, laid aside the ensigns of his office at Barking church, and
repaired to the Tower as a private gentleman; which was so highly
resented by the Treasurer, that he committed him and several of the
principal citizens to prison. This proceeding the King so far approved,
that though he discharged the Mayor, he seized the city liberties, and
having appointed a Custos of the city, there was no Mayor of London for
twelve years after.

In 1306, sea-coal beginning to be much used in the suburbs of London, by
brewers, dyers, and others requiring great fires; the nobility and
gentry complained to King Edward II. that the air was infected by the
noisome smell, and the thick clouds of smoke it occasioned, to the
endangering of the health of the inhabitants; upon which a proclamation
was issued; forbidding it to be used: but little regard being paid to
it, the King appointed a commission of oyer and terminer, to enquire
after those who had acted in open defiance of this injunction.

In the beginning of the next reign, the city obtained a very great
addition to its privileges; for in the year 1327, King Edward III.
granted the citizens two charters; the first of which contained not only
a confirmation of the ancient and valuable liberties and immunities of
the citizens, but also the following additional privileges.

1. That the Mayor shall be constantly one of the Judges of oyer and
terminer, for the trial of criminals confined in Newgate.

2. The citizens to have the privilege of trying a thief or robber within
the jurisdiction of the city, and the power of reclaiming a citizen
apprehended elsewhere for felony, in order to try him within the city;
with a right to all the goods and chattels of all felons, convicted
within the jurisdiction of the city.

3. The office of Escheator is conferred upon, and given in perpetuity to
the Mayor.

4. The King’s Marshal, Steward, and Clerk of the houshold, are exempted
from having any authority in the city.

5. For the greater convenience of citizens resorting to country fairs,
they are granted the privilege of holding a court of Pye-powder in such
places, for the determination of all contests that happen in each of
those fairs.

6. That the citizens should be only assessed in common with their fellow
subjects, towards general subsidies, grants, and contributions.

7. That no market be kept within seven miles of the city of London.

8. And that the city liberties shall not be seized for a personal
offence, or iniquitous judgment of any of its magistrates, &c.

By the second charter, Southwark is granted for the good and benefit of
the citizens.

The same Prince, in the year 1354, granted the city the privilege of
having gold or silver maces carried before the chief magistrate; a
privilege then peculiar to London; for all other cities and towns in the
kingdom were, by a royal precept, expresly commanded not to use maces of
any other metal than copper; and this is the time when, it is supposed
by some, that the title of _Lord_ was first added to that of Mayor.

In the year 1348, the city was visited by a most terrible pestilence,
which continued to rage till the church yards were found not capacious
enough to receive the bodies. This induced several persons to purchase
ground to supply that defect; and in one of these burying grounds,
bought by Sir Walter Manny, were interred the next year 50,000 persons;
an amazing number, considering the small extent of this metropolis at
that time: by this dreadful pestilence 100,000 persons are said to have
died in this city. This is a very convincing proof that London was at
that time extremely populous.

By this terrible pestilence provisions were reduced so low, that the
best fed ox was sold for 4s. the best cow at 1s. the best heifer or
steer at 6d. the best wether at 4d. the best ewe at 3d. the best lamb at
2d. the best hog at 5d. and a fine horse, formerly worth 40s. at 6s. 8d.
_Arnold’s Chronicle._

But notwithstanding this deplorable calamity, the wealth and dignity of
the city were soon after so great, that in the year 1363, the Kings of
Scotland, France, and Cyprus, who came into England to visit King Edward
III. were entertained at dinner, with his Majesty, the Prince of Wales
his son, and most of the nobility, by Henry Picard, late Mayor of
London.

In the fifth year of the reign of King Richard II. the city suffered
greatly by the rebellion of Wat Hilliard, commonly called Wat Tyler,
from his employment; he being a tyler of Dartford in Kent. This fellow,
exasperated at the impudence and insolence of the collectors of the poll
tax, one of whom pulled up his daughter’s cloaths to see if she was
arrived at the age of puberty; after killing the collector, excited the
people to join him, in defence of their daughters, and to abolish the
laws and taxes, which were thought extremely burthensome. They readily
entered into this proposal, marched to Black Heath, and were soon
increased to 100,000 men.

This prodigious mob entered Southwark on the 10th of June 1381, set at
liberty the prisoners in the King’s Bench and Marshalsea prisons, and
levelled to the ground the houses of all lawyers and questmen, and while
one party went to Lambeth, where they burnt the archiepiscopal palace,
with the rich furniture, books and registers, another destroyed the
common stews along the bankside, then kept by Flemish bawds, who farmed
them of the city.

In this dreadful confusion, the Lord Mayor caused the bridge gate to be
shut, and fortified; but the next day they were admitted into the city,
and the shambles and wine cellars set open for their accommodation.
Being now joined by the city rabble, they hasted to the Savoy, the Duke
of Lancaster’s palace, which was the most magnificent edifice in the
kingdom, and setting fire to it, caused proclamation to be made, that
none should appropriate any thing to his own use, upon pain of death.
They then ran to the Temple, which at that time belonged to the Lord
High Treasurer; that edifice they also burnt, with all the records in
Chancery, and the books and papers belonging to the students of the law;
and all the inns of court they served in the same manner.

After this, dividing themselves into three bodies, one proceeded to the
rich priory of St. John of Jerusalem, near Smithfield, which they
likewise burnt; and then marching to the stately mansion house at
Highbury, beyond Islington, set fire to that edifice, through hatred to
Sir Robert Hales, the High Treasurer, who was prior of the one, and
proprietor of the other.

The second division marched to the Tower, which they entered,
notwithstanding its being guarded by six hundred men at arms, and the
same number of archers, and there seizing Simon Sudbury, Archbishop of
Canterbury, and the above Sir Robert Hales, caused them both to be
beheaded on Tower hill.

The third division, which were the Essex party, proceeded to Mile-end,
where being met by the King, who agreed to all their demands, they the
same day dispersed, and returned home.

Wat Tyler, with the rest of his desperate crew, however, continued
committing the greatest disorders in London and Westminster, and, under
the plausible pretence of reforming public abuses, they set open the
prisons of the Fleet and Newgate, murdered many of the most eminent
citizens, and dragging the Flemish merchants from the churches, where
they had fled for refuge, beheaded them in the streets. Nor did their
monstrous cruelty stop here; for they proceeded murdering and burning in
a most horrid manner in many parts of the city; and not only made
proclamation for the beheading of all lawyers, and persons concerned in
the Exchequer, but even of all who were able to write.

At length King Richard, encouraged by his success at Mile-end, sent to
let Wat Tyler know that he would have a conference with him in
Smithfield, upon which that rebel marched slowly thither, at the head of
his forces; but no sooner saw the King, than setting spurs to his horse,
he boldly rode up to his Majesty, leaving all his companions behind. His
behaviour and proposals were equally brutish and absurd, for he would be
satisfied with nothing less than a commission to behead all lawyers, and
the abolition of all the ancient laws of the kingdom; at which, William
Walworth, the Lord Mayor, was ordered to arrest him, when that brave
magistrate gave him such a blow on the head with his sword, that he fell
wounded from his horse, and was soon dispatched.

The rebels, in the mean time, observing what was done, cried out, Our
Captain is murdered, let us revenge his death, and immediately bent
their bows: when Richard, though but fifteen years of age, with
astonishing prudence and bravery rode up to them, crying, “My friends,
will you kill your King? be not troubled for the loss of your leader. I
will be your captain, and grant what you desire.” Upon which they
changed their resolution, and marched under his conduct to St. George’s
Fields, where finding a thousand citizens completely armed, they were
struck with such an amazing panic, that, throwing down their arms, they
begged for mercy, which being granted, they immediately dispersed.

Several writers ascribe to the action of this day, the addition of the
dagger to the arms of the city, in remembrance of the good service done
by them, and particularly by the Lord Mayor.

This, and other rebellions, being suppressed, King Richard, in the year
1390, appointed a great tournament to be held in Smithfield, on the
Sunday after Michaelmas; and having caused it to be proclaimed in all
the principal courts of Europe, several princes and noblemen from
Germany, France, the Netherlands, and other countries, came to
distinguish themselves by their courage and military skill. On the day
appointed, which was Sunday in the afternoon, a pompous cavalcade of
sixty ladies set out from the Tower, all richly dressed, and mounted on
fine horses, each leading an armed Knight by a silver chain, attended by
their Esquires, who passing through Cheapside proceeded to Smithfield,
where the justs continued four days, in the presence of the King, the
Queen, and the whole court; his Majesty himself giving proofs of his
skill and dexterity on the second day. During the whole time open house
was kept at the King’s expence, at the Bishop of London’s palace, for
the entertainment of all persons of distinction, and every night the
diversions concluded with a ball.

Two years after, the city refusing to lend the King a sum of money, and
some of the citizens beating and abusing a Lombard merchant, for
offering to advance the sum required, the King was so exasperated, that
he sent for the Lord Mayor, Aldermen, Sheriffs, and twenty four of the
principal commoners of the city, to attend him at Nottingham, which
having done, the Mayor was committed prisoner to Windsor castle, and the
rest to other prisons. A commission, under the great seal, was then
granted to the Dukes of York and Gloucester, the King’s uncles, to
enquire into that and other offences, of which the above persons being
found guilty, they were not only fined 3000 marks, but the liberties of
the city were seized; the Mayor was degraded from his office, and a
Custos appointed in his room; the Sheriffs were also degraded, and
others chosen; and, by the King’s precept, seventeen persons were
appointed Aldermen, during the royal pleasure. As a farther
mortification to the city, the King not only withdrew, with the
nobility, to York, but removed the courts of justice to that city.

However, upon payment of the fine of 3000 marks, all the city liberties
were restored, except the privilege of chusing her own Mayor. And the
King, returning to London, was met at Shene, or Richmond Heath, by four
hundred citizens on horseback, dressed in a rich uniform, with the
Recorder at their head, who made a speech, in which he humbly begged
pardon for their past offences, and earnestly entreated his Majesty to
honour the Chamber of London with his presence; to which he consenting,
they attended him to St. George’s church in Southwark, where he was
received by a solemn procession of the clergy, and five hundred boys in
surplices, with the Bishop of London at their head. At London bridge he
was presented with a fine horse, adorned with trappings of gold brocade,
and his Queen with a fine pad, and very noble furniture.

Never was the city more richly embellished than on this occasion, for
the citizens of all ranks strove to outvie each other, in honour of
their reconciled Sovereign; the streets were lined with the city
companies in their formalities, and the conduits all the while ran with
variety of wines.

At the standard in Cheapside, a boy dressed in white, to represent an
angel, stood in a magnificent pageant, and upon the King’s approach,
presented him with wine in a gold cup, and placed on his head a crown of
gold, adorned with a variety of pearls and precious stones, and likewise
another on the head of the Queen. After which their Majesties were
conducted to their palace at Westminster, by the Lord Mayor, Aldermen,
and Sheriffs, who, the next day, made his Majesty a present of two
silver basons gilt, with 1000 nobles of gold in each, curious pictures
of the Trinity, valued at 800l. and several other valuable presents. But
after all, they were obliged to pay him 10,000l. before he would restore
them the right of chusing their own magistrates.

The King, and his royal consort Isabella, a daughter of France, were
some years after again conducted, with extraordinary magnificence, thro’
the city; but in 1398, the citizens petitioning to have their taxes
taken off, and against entering into a treaty with the French King,
about the delivering up of Calais, Richard was so exasperated against
them, that he obliged many of the richest of the citizens to sign and
seal several blank papers sent them by the ministry, who afterwards
filled them up at their pleasure, with such sums as would effectually
drain them; and this rendered him so odious to the citizens, that when
Henry Duke of Lancaster arrived from France, they received him with open
gates, and expressed their joy by magnificent shews, solemn processions
of the clergy, and loud acclamations; and, in short, after the late King
was made prisoner, Henry was received in great pomp by the Lord Mayor,
Aldermen, Sheriffs, and all the several companies in their formalities.

The reign of Henry IV. was not distinguished by any remarkable disputes
between that King and the citizens; but in the year 1407, a dreadful
plague carried off 30,000 of the inhabitants, whereby corn became so
cheap, that wheat sold at 3s. 4d. the quarter.

In the reign of Henry V. the citizens chiefly distinguished themselves
by the splendid cavalcade, with which they conducted that brave Prince
through the city, after the glorious battle of Agincourt, In this reign
Moorgate was first built, and Sir Henry Barton, the Lord Mayor, first
ordered lanthorns to be hung out, for illuminating the streets by night.
Indeed it is surprizing, that so useful and necessary a regulation was
not made much earlier, considering the multitude and wealth of the
inhabitants, the brooks which still ran through some of the streets, and
the dirt occasioned by their lying much lower than at present.

After the death of this great conqueror, his young son Henry VI. being
crowned King of France at Paris, the citizens, on his return, expressed
their loyalty in a very extraordinary manner; for the royal infant was
met on Black Heath by the Lord Mayor of London, dressed in crimson
velvet, with a large furred hat, a girdle of gold about his waist, and a
bawdrick of gold about his neck, waving down his back. He was followed
by three horsemen, dressed in scarlet and silver, and attended by the
Aldermen in scarlet gowns, and crimson hoods, while the citizens were
cloathed in white gowns, and scarlet hoods, with the symbol belonging to
each mystery, richly embroidered upon their sleeves. They were all on
horseback, and from thence preceded his Majesty to London, where he was
received with the utmost pomp. The city on this occasion was decorated
with rich silks and carpets, and on the bridge, and in the streets,
through which the cavalcade passed, were erected a variety of stately
pageants, filled with persons representing the Muses, Graces, and
Sciences; and from these pageants, orations were made, and concerts
performed of vocal and instrumental music. Two days after, the Lord
Mayor and Aldermen attended the King at Westminster, and presented him
with a golden hamper, containing 1000l. in nobles.

It is impossible, in the short compass allotted to this part of the
work, to give an account of the several rebellions and revolutions
during the life of this unhappy Sovereign, and of the manner in which
the citizens interested themselves in each: it is sufficient to add,
that notwithstanding these early professions of loyalty, the ill success
and weakness of Henry, made them almost constantly join his enemies, and
was one principal cause of his ruin.

King Edward IV. therefore, in the second year of his reign, shewed his
gratitude for the favours he had received from them, by granting the
city a charter, by which all the ancient rights and privileges of the
citizens were confirmed, and the following additional privileges
bestowed.

1. The Lord Mayor, Recorder, and Aldermen past the chair, are appointed
perpetual justices of peace in the city; and are constituted justices of
oyer and terminer, for the trial of all malefactors within their own
jurisdiction.

2. For the better ascertaining the customs of the city, when a plea is
brought in any of the superior courts, relating to those customs, the
Lord Mayor and Aldermen are impowered to declare, by the mouth of their
Recorder, whether the point in controversy be a custom of London, or
not; and if, upon enquiry, it be found to be such, then it is to be
recorded, and remain an established custom to all futurity.

3. The Lord Mayor and Aldermen are for ever exempted from serving in all
foreign assizes, juries, or attaints, and from the offices of assessor,
collector of taxes, overseer, or comptroller of all public duties
without the jurisdiction of the city.

4. The citizens are allowed the privilege of holding an annual fair in
the borough of Southwark, together with a court of Pye-powder, with the
rights and customs thereto belonging, &c. all at the ancient fee farm of
10l. _per annum_.

Afterwards, in the year 1479, the city gave the same Prince 1923l. 19s.
8d. for the liberty of purchasing lands, &c. in mortmain, to the value
of 200 marks _per annum_; and also purchased of the King, for 7000l. the
offices of package, portage, garbling, gauging, wine-drawer and coroner,
to be enjoyed by them and their successors for ever.

In the same year, a dreadful pestilence raged in London, which swept
away an incredible number of people.

On the death of Edward IV. the Duke of Buckingham strove in vain to make
the citizens join in raising the Duke of Gloucester to the throne, to
the prejudice of the young Prince, Edward V. by making a long speech to
them in Guildhall. The Lord Mayor, Aldermen, and some of the Common
Council, were, however, prevailed upon to go and persuade that inhuman
monster to accept of the crown; and afterwards the Lord Mayor contested
with the citizens of Winchester the right of being chief Butler at the
coronation of a man who was a disgrace to human nature: but the Mayor of
London had for some ages enjoyed this privilege, and was not now denied
it.

In the beginning of the reign of Henry VII. the sweating sickness first
raged in London, carrying off great numbers within twenty-four hours;
but those who survived that time generally recovered; and of this
disease died two Lord Mayors and one of the Sheriffs, in the space of
the year.

The next year the privileges of the citizens were struck at by their own
magistrates, in a very extraordinary act of Common Council, which
enjoined the citizens, under the penalty of an hundred pounds, not to
carry any goods or merchandize to any fair or market within the kingdom,
for the term of seven years; but this scandalous and unjust by-law was
the next year set aside by act of Parliament.

In the year 1500, the plague carried off 20,000 persons in London; and
during this reign the city also suffered greatly by the oppressions of
the King’s ministers Empson and Dudley; Alderman Capel was, upon several
penal laws, condemned to pay a fine of 2700l. but by the intercession of
friends, it was mitigated to 1600l. Thomas Knesworth, who had been
Mayor, with Richard Shoare and Roger Grove, his Sheriffs, were accused
of abuses committed in their offices, for which they were dragged to the
Marshalsea, and confined without any legal process, till they redeemed
themselves by paying 14,000l. and, in short, Sir Laurence Aylmer was, in
the next year after he had served the office of Mayor, also imprisoned
by these rapacious ministers, in order to extort a sum of money for his
liberty: but the death of Henry VII. delivered him and many others from
their troubles.

King Henry VIII. the year after his accession to the throne, came in the
habit of one of the yeomen of the guard, to see the march of the city
watch; it being an ancient custom for the watch, who were then a body of
military forces, to make a pompous march on the vigils of St. John
Baptist, and St. Peter and Paul. His Majesty was a spectator on St.
John’s eve, and was so highly delighted with the sight, that he returned
on the eve of St. Peter, accompanied by his royal consort, and the
principal nobility, and staid in Mercer’s Hall, Cheapside, to see the
procession repeated.

The march was begun by the city music, followed by the Lord Mayor’s
officers, in party-coloured liveries; then the swordbearer, on
horseback, in beautiful armour, preceded the Lord Mayor, mounted on a
stately horse adorned with rich trappings, attended by a giant and two
pages on horseback, three pageants, morrice dancers and footmen; next
came the Sheriffs, preceded by their officers, and attended by their
giants, pages, pageants, and morrice dancers. Then marched a great body
of demi-lancers in bright armour, on stately horses: next followed a
body of carabineers in white fustian coats, with the city arms on their
backs and breasts: then marched a body of archers with their bows bent,
and shafts of arrows by their sides; followed by a party of pikemen with
their corslets and helmets; after whom marched a body of halberdiers in
their corslets and helmets; and the march was closed by a great party of
billmen, with helmets and aprons of mail.

The whole body, which consisted of about 2000 men, had between every
division a certain number of musicians, who were answered in their
proper places by the like number of drums, with standards and ensigns,
in the same manner as veteran troops. This nocturnal march was lighted
by 940 cressets, which were large lanthorns fixed at the end of poles,
and carried over mens shoulders; two hundred of which were at the city
expence, five hundred at that of the companies, and two hundred and
forty were found by the city constables.

The march began at the conduit in Cheapside, and passed through that
street, Cornhill, and Leadenhall street to Aldgate; whence it returned
by Fenchurch street, Gracechurch street, Cornhill, and Cheapside, to the
conduit.

During this march, the houses on each side the streets were decorated
with greens and flowers wrought into garlands, and intermixed with a
great number of lamps. _Stow._

This splendid procession constantly repeated twice a year, is not only a
proof of the fondness for shew which then prevailed, but lets us see
that the city was then watched by men completely armed; a body of troops
of a peculiar kind, raised and maintained by the city.

The same year, Sir William Fitz-William, Alderman of Bread street ward,
was disfranchised for refusing to serve the office of Sheriff. _Fabian’s
Chronicle._

And in 1512, the Sheriffs of London and Middlesex were first impowered
to impannel juries for the city courts, each juror so impannelled to be
a citizen worth an hundred marks.

As the history of the city of London must necessarily include that of
the manners of the inhabitants, we have given some instances of their
fondness for pompous and splendid processions, and it may hereafter be
necessary to add others, to enable the reader to form an idea of the
difference between the past times and the present. I shall here mention
amusements of a different kind, graced with the presence of a sovereign
Prince, and which cannot fail of entertaining the reader.

It was usual, on the first of May, for all the citizens who were able,
to divert themselves in the woods and meadows with May-games, diversions
not confined to the lower class, but equally the entertainment of
persons of the highest rank; a remarkable instance of which is inserted
in _Hall’s Chronicle_, under the year 1515, when that author observes,
that King Henry VIII. and Queen Catharine, accompanied by many Lords and
Ladies, rode a maying from Greenwich to the high ground of Shooter’s
Hill, where, as they passed along, they saw a company of 200 tall
yeomen, all cloathed in green, with green hoods and bows and arrows.
One, who was their Chieftain, was called Robin Hood, and desired the
King and all his company to stay and see his men shoot, to which the
King agreeing, he whistled, and all the two hundred discharged their
arrows at once, which they repeated on his whistling again. Their arrows
had something placed in the heads of them that made them whistle as they
flew, and all together made a loud and very uncommon noise, at which the
King and Queen were greatly delighted. The gentleman who assumed the
character of Robin Hood then desired the King and Queen, with their
retinue, to enter the Green Wood, where, in arbours made with boughs
intermixed with flowers, they were plentifully served with venison and
wine, by Robin Hood and his men.

About two years after an event happened, which occasioned the epithet of
Evil to be added to this day of rejoicing. The citizens being extremely
exasperated at the encouragement given to foreigners, a Priest named
Bell was persuaded to preach against them at the Spital, and in a very
inflaming sermon he incited the people to oppose all strangers; this
occasioned frequent quarrels in the streets, for which some Englishmen
were committed to prison.

Suddenly a rumour arose, that on Mayday all the foreigners would be
assassinated, and several strangers fled; this coming to the knowledge
of the King’s Council, Cardinal Wolsey sent for the Lord Mayor and
several of the City Council, told them what he had heard, and exhorted
them to preserve the peace. Upon this affair a court of Common Council
was assembled at Guildhall, on the evening before Mayday, in which it
was resolved to order every man to shut up his doors and keep his
servants at home; and this advice being immediately communicated to the
Cardinal, met with his approbation.

Upon this every Alderman sent to inform his ward, that no man should
stir out of his house after nine o’clock, but keep his doors shut and
his servants within, till nine in the morning. This order had not been
long given, when one of the Aldermen, returning from his ward, observed
two young men at play in Cheapside, and many others looking at them. He
would have sent them to the Compter, but they were soon rescued, and the
cry raised of _’Prentices, ’Prentices! Clubs, Clubs!_ Instantly the
people arose; by eleven o’clock they amounted to six or seven hundred;
and the crowd still increasing, they rescued from Newgate and the
Compter the prisoners committed for abusing the foreigners: while the
Mayor and Sheriffs, who were present, made proclamation in the King’s
name; but, instead of obeying it, they broke open the houses of many
Frenchmen and other foreigners, and continued plundering them till three
in the morning, when beginning to disperse, the Mayor and his attendants
took 300 of them, and committed them to the several prisons. While this
riot lasted, the Lieutenant of the Tower discharged several pieces of
ordnance against the city, but without doing much mischief; and about
five in the morning, several of the nobility marched thither with all
the forces they could assemble.

On the 4th of May, the Lord Mayor, the Duke of Norfolk, the Earl of
Surry, and others, sate upon the trial of the offenders at Guildhall,
the Duke of Norfolk entering the city with 1300 men. That day several
were indicted, and on the next thirteen were sentenced to be hanged,
drawn and quartered, for the execution of whom ten gallowses were set up
in several parts of the city, upon wheels, to be removed from street to
street, and from door to door.

On the 7th of May several others were found guilty, and received the
same sentence as the former, and soon after were drawn upon hurdles to
the standard in Cheapside; but when one was executed, and the rest about
to be turned off, a respite came, and they were remanded back to prison.

After this the soldiers who had kept watch in the city were withdrawn,
which making the citizens flatter themselves that the King’s displeasure
against them was not so great as they had imagined, the Lord Mayor,
Recorder, and several Aldermen, went in mourning gowns to wait upon the
King at Greenwich, when, having attended for some time at the privy
chamber door, his Majesty with several of the nobility came forth, upon
which, all of them falling upon their knees, the Recorder, in the name
of the rest, in the most humble and submissive terms, begged that he
would have mercy on them for their negligence, and compassion on the
offenders, whom he represented as a small number of light persons. His
Majesty let them know that he was really displeased, and that they ought
to wail and be sorry for it; for as they had not attempted to fight with
those whom they pretended were so small a number of light persons, they
must have winked at the matter; he therefore ordered them to repair to
the Lord Chancellor, who would give them an answer. Upon which they
retired deeply mortified.

Being informed that the King was to be at Westminster Hall on the 22d of
May, they resolved to repair thither, which they did with the consent of
Cardinal Wolsey Lord High Chancellor. The King sat at the upper end of
Westminster Hall, under a cloth of state, with the Cardinal and several
of the nobility: and the Lord Mayor, Aldermen, Recorder, and several of
the Common-Council attended; the prisoners, who then amounted to about
400, were brought in their shirts bound together with cords, and with
halters about their necks, and among these were eleven women. The
Cardinal, having sharply rebuked the Mayor, Aldermen and Commonalty for
their negligence, told the prisoners, that, for their offences against
the laws of the realm, and against his Majesty’s crown and dignity, they
had deserved death; upon which they all set up a piteous cry, of “Mercy,
gracious Lord, mercy!” which so moved the King, that, at the earnest
intreaty of the Lords, he pronounced them pardoned; upon which giving a
great shout, they threw up their halters towards the top of the hall,
crying God save the King! After this affair the May-games were not so
commonly used as before.

By the following account the reader will see, that our hospitable
ancestors were not less fond of the pleasures of the table, than of
outward pomp. Mr. Stow observes, that in the year 1531, eleven gentlemen
of the law being promoted to the dignity of the coif, they gave a
splendid and elegant entertainment in the Bishop of Ely’s palace in
Holborn, for five days successively, at which were present the King,
Queen, foreign Ministers, the Lord Mayor and Aldermen, the Judges, the
Master of the rolls, the Masters in chancery, the Serjeants at law, the
principal Merchants of London, with many Knights and Esquires, and a
certain number of citizens belonging to the chief companies of the city.

This being one of the greatest entertainments recorded in history, an
account of it cannot be unacceptable to the reader: but as there were
three poulterers concerned in providing the poultry, and only one of
their accounts which we are able to communicate, it will be very
deficient; however, as this great entertainment was given but about two
hundred and thirty years ago, the subjoined account will shew the vast
disparity between the prices of provisions then and now, and
consequently the great disproportion between the scarcity of money at
that time, and its plenty at present.

Twenty-four large oxen, at 1l. 6s. 8d. each.

The carcase of a large ox from the market, 1l. 4s.

One hundred sheep, at 2s. 10d. each.

Fifty-one calves, at 4s. 8d. each.

Thirty-four hogs, at 3s. 8d. each.

Ninety-one pigs, at 6d. each.

Fourteen dozen of swans, no price set down.

Capons of Greece, ten dozen, each at 1s. 8d.

Kentish capons, nine dozen and a half, at 1s. each.

Nineteen dozen of common capons, at 6d. each.

Seven dozen and nine heathcocks, at 8d. each.

Fourteen dozen and eight common cocks, at 3d. each.

The best pullets (no number mentioned) at 2½d. each.

Common ditto, 2d. each.

Thirty-seven dozen of pigeons, at 10d. a dozen.

Three hundred and forty dozen of larks, at 5d. a dozen.

In the year 1532, a general muster of the citizens was held at Mile-End,
when the names of all capable of bearing arms were taken down, from the
age of sixteen to that of sixty; as were also an account of the weapons,
armour, and other military accoutrements belonging to the city.

Upon this occasion the principal citizens were dressed in white, with
caps and feathers of the same colour; the Lord Mayor, Aldermen,
Recorder, and Sheriffs, wore white armour, and coats of black velvet,
embroidered with the city arms; they had velvet caps on their heads, and
rode on fine horses adorned with magnificent trappings, with gold chains
about their necks, and battle-axes in their hands. Each of the Aldermen
and the Recorder, was attended with four halberdiers in white silk or
buff coats, with gilt halberts; and the Lord Mayor, by sixteen men in
white sattin jackets, with gold chains, caps and feathers, and long gilt
halberts; he had also four footmen in white sattin, and two pages in
crimson velvet, with gold brocade waistcoats; these pages were mounted
on fine horses, adorned with rich furniture, one of them carrying the
Lord Mayor’s helmet, and the other his pole-ax, both richly gilt, Most
of the citizens of distinction were, on this occasion, dressed in white
silk, and wore gold chains with a variety of rich jewels.

The citizens rendezvoused and were mustered early in the morning at Mile
End, and before nine in the forenoon began their march, when entering
Aldgate, they proceeded through the city, in admirable order, to
Westminster; where they passed in review before the King and most of the
nobility, who were highly delighted at their splendid appearance. From
thence they marched round St. James’s Park, and down Holborn to
Leadenhall, where they separated at five o’clock in the evening. So far
our author.

But if we add to this splendid cavalcade, that every man wore his beard
and hair, which were probably neatly curled and powdered, we must be
sensible that the citizens, in this procession, had a strange mixture of
gravity and foppery, and that, fond as we are of dress, we were greatly
outdone in this particular by our ancestors. King Henry however loved
shew, and the citizens took great pains to please him, of which the
following is another remarkable instance, which, tho’ very long, we
shall insert, in order to give our readers an idea of the taste of the
citizens of that age, in regard to elegance and grandeur: and we chuse
to select this instance, as the city appears to have been decorated with
greater pomp than at any time before or since.

The King having divorced Queen Catharine, and married Anne Boleyn, or
Boloine, who was descended from Godfrey Boloine, Mayor of this city, and
intending her coronation, sent to order the Lord Mayor, not only to make
all the preparations necessary for conducting his royal consort from
Greenwich, by water, to the Tower of London; but to adorn the city after
the most magnificent manner, for her passage through it to Westminster.

In obedience to the royal precept, Mr. Stow observes, that the Mayor and
Common Council not only ordered the company of Haberdashers, of which
the Lord Mayor was a member, to prepare a magnificent state barge; but
enjoined all the city corporations to provide themselves with barges,
and to adorn them in the most superb manner, and especially to have them
supplied with good bands of music.

On the 29th of May, the time prefixed for this pompous procession by
water, the Mayor, Aldermen and Commons assembled at St. Mary Hill; the
Mayor and Aldermen in scarlet, with gold chains, and those who were
knights, with the collars of SS. At one they went on board the city
barge at Billingsgate, which was most magnificently decorated; and
attended by fifty noble barges, belonging to the several companies of
the city, with each its own corporation on board; and, for the better
regulation of this procession, it was ordered, that each barge should
keep twice their lengths asunder.

Thus regulated, the city barge was preceded by another mounted with
ordnance, and the figures of dragons and other monsters, incessantly
emitting fire and smoke, with much noise. Then the city barge, attended
on the right by the Haberdashers state barge, called the Bachelors,
which was covered with gold brocade, and adorned with sails of silk,
with two rich standards of the King’s and Queen’s arms at her head and
stern, besides a variety of flags and streamers, containing the arms of
that company, and those of the Merchant Adventurers; besides which the
shrouds and ratlines were hung with a number of small bells: on the left
was a barge that contained a very beautiful mount, on which stood a
white falcon crowned, perching upon a golden stump encircled with roses,
being the Queen’s emblem; and round the mount sat several beautiful
virgins, singing, and playing upon instruments. The other barges
followed in regular order, till they came below Greenwich. On their
return the procession began with that barge which was before the last,
in which were the Mayor’s and Sheriff’s officers, and this was followed
by those of the inferior companies, ascending to the Lord Mayor’s, which
immediately preceded that of the Queen, who was attended by the
Bachelors or state barge, with the magnificence of which her Majesty was
much delighted; and being arrived at the Tower, she returned the Lord
Mayor and Aldermen thanks, for the pomp with which she had been
conducted thither.

Two days after, the Lord Mayor, in a gown of crimson velvet, and a rich
collar of SS, attended by the Sheriffs and two domestics in red and
white damask, went to receive the Queen at the Tower of London, whence
the Sheriffs returned to see that every thing was in order. The streets
were just before new gravelled from the Tower to Temple Bar, and railed
in on each side; within the rails near Grasschurch, stood a body of
Anseatic merchants, and next to them the several corporations of the
city in their formalities, reaching to the Aldermens station at the
upper end of Cheapside. On the opposite side were placed the city
constables dressed in silk and velvet, with staffs in their hands, to
prevent the breaking in of the mob, or any other disturbance. On this
occasion, Gracechurch street and Cornhill were hung with crimson and
scarlet cloth, and the sides of the houses of a place then called
Goldsmith’s row, in Cheapside, were adorned with gold brocades, velvet
and rich tapestry.

The procession began from the Tower with twelve of the French
Ambassador’s domestics in blue velvet, the trappings of their horses
being blue sarsnet, interspersed with white crosses; after whom marched
those of the equestrian order, two and two, followed by the Judges in
their robes, two and two; then came the Knights of the Bath in violet
gowns, purfled with menever. Next came the Abbots, Barons, Bishops,
Earls and Marquises, in their robes, two and two. Then the Lord
Chancellor, followed by the Venetian Ambassador and the Archbishop of
York: next the French Ambassador and the Archbishop of Canterbury,
followed by two gentlemen representing the Dukes of Normandy and
Aquitain; after whom rode the Lord Mayor of London with his mace, and
Garter in his coat of arms; then the Duke of Suffolk, Lord High Steward,
followed by the Deputy Marshal of England, and all the other officers of
state in their robes, carrying the symbols of their several offices:
then others of the nobility in crimson velvet, and all the Queen’s
officers in scarlet, followed by her Chancellor uncovered, who
immediately preceded his mistress.

The Queen was dressed in silver brocade, with a mantle of the same
furred with ermine; her hair was dishevelled, and she wore a chaplet
upon her head set with jewels of inestimable value. She sat in a litter
covered with silver tissue, and carried by two beautiful pads cloathed
in white damask, and led by her footmen. Over the litter was carried a
canopy of cloth of gold, with a silver bell at each corner, supported by
sixteen Knights alternately, by four at a time.

After her Majesty came her Chamberlain, followed by her Master of Horse,
leading a beautiful pad, with a side-saddle and trappings of silver
tissue. Next came seven ladies in crimson velvet, faced with gold
brocade, mounted on beautiful horses with gold trappings. Then followed
two chariots covered with cloth of gold, in the first of which were the
Duchess of Norfolk and the Marchioness of Dorset, and in the second four
ladies in crimson velvet; then followed seven ladies dressed in the same
manner, on horseback, with magnificent trappings, followed by another
chariot all in white, with six ladies in crimson velvet; this was
followed by another all in red, with eight ladies in the same dress with
the former: next came thirty gentlewomen, attendants to the Ladies of
honour; they were on horseback, dressed in silks and velvet; and the
cavalcade was closed by the horse guards.

This pompous procession being arrived in Fenchurch street, the Queen
stopped at a beautiful pageant, crouded with children in mercantile
habits; who congratulated her Majesty upon the joyful occasion of her
happy arrival in the city.

Thence she proceeded to Grace church corner, where was erected a very
magnificent pageant, at the expence of the company of Anseatic
Merchants, in which was represented Mount Parnassus, with the fountain
of Helicon, of white marble, out of which arose four springs about four
feet high, centering at the top in a small globe, from which issued
plenty of Rhenish wine till night. On the Mount sat Apollo, at his feet
was Calliope, and beneath were the rest of the Muses, surrounding the
Mount, and playing upon a variety of musical instruments, at whose feet
were inscribed several epigrams suitable to the occasion, in letters of
gold.

Her Majesty then proceeded to Leadenhall, where stood a pageant,
representing a hill encompassed with red and white roses; and above it
was a golden stump, upon which a white falcon, descending from above,
perched, and was quickly followed by an angel, who put a crown of gold
upon his head. A little lower on the hilloc sat St. Anne, surrounded by
her progeny, one of whom made an oration, in which was a wish that her
Majesty might prove extremely prolific.

The procession then advanced to the conduit in Cornhill; where the
Graces sat enthroned, with a fountain before them incessantly
discharging wine; and underneath, a Poet, who described the qualities
peculiar to each of these amiable deities, and presented the Queen with
their several gifts.

The cavalcade thence proceeded to a great conduit that stood opposite to
Mercers Hall in Cheapside, and, upon that occasion, was painted with a
variety of emblems, and during the solemnity and remaining part of the
day, ran with different sorts of wine, for the entertainment of the
populace.

At the end of Wood street, the standard there was finely embellished
with royal portraitures and a number of flags, on which were painted
coats of arms and trophies, and above was a concert of vocal and
instrumental music.

At the upper end of Cheapside was the Aldermens station, where the
Recorder addressed the Queen in a very elegant oration, and, in the name
of the citizens, presented her with a thousand marks in a purse of gold
tissue, which her Majesty very gracefully received.

At a small distance, by Cheapside conduit, was a pageant, in which were
seated Minerva, Juno, and Venus; before whom stood the god Mercury, who,
in their names, presented the Queen a golden apple.

At St. Paul’s gate was a fine pageant, in which sat three ladies richly
dressed, with each a chaplet on her head, and a tablet in her hand,
containing Latin inscriptions.

At the east end of St. Paul’s cathedral, the Queen was entertained by
some of the scholars belonging to St. Paul’s school, with verses in
praise of the King and her Majesty, with which she seemed highly
delighted.

Thence proceeding to Ludgate, which was finely decorated, her Majesty
was entertained with several songs adapted to the occasion, sung in
concert by men and boys upon the leads over the gate.

At the end of Shoe lane, in Fleet street, a handsome tower with four
turrets was erected upon the conduit, in each of which stood one of the
cardinal Virtues, with their several symbols; who, addressing themselves
to the Queen, promised they would never leave her, but be always her
constant attendants. Within the tower was an excellent concert of music,
and the conduit all the while ran with various sorts of wine.

At Temple Bar she was again entertained with songs, sung in concert by a
choir of men and boys; and having from thence proceeded to Westminster,
she returned the Lord Mayor thanks for his good offices, and those of
the citizens that day. _Stow’s Annals._

The day after, the Lord Mayor, Aldermen, and Sheriffs, performed their
several offices at the coronation; and, in return for the great expence
the city had been at upon the above occasion, the Lord Mayor, Aldermen,
and forty of the principal citizens, had the honour of being afterwards
invited to the christening of the Princess Elizabeth.

In the year 1551, King Edward VI. gave the city a charter, by which he
not only confirmed all its former privileges, but granted the Lord
Mayor, Aldermen, and citizens, several lands and tenements in Southwark,
with the manor thereof, and its appurtenances; the assize of bread,
wine, beer, and ale; a fair for three days; and the offices of Coroner,
Escheator, and Clerk of the market, which are for ever vested in the
Lord Mayor and his successors.

In the beginning of the year 1552, the celebrated company of the
Anseatic merchants, called here the merchants of the Steelyard, were
dissolved, they having engrossed almost the whole trade of the kingdom;
for in the preceding year they exported 40,000 pieces of cloth, while
all the English merchants together did not export 1100.

Upon the breaking out of the rebellion under Sir Thomas Wyat, occasioned
by the report of Queen Mary’s intended marriage with Philip of Spain,
the city was thrown into a violent commotion, and on his marching to
Deptford, the Lord Mayor, Aldermen, Sheriffs, and citizens, had not only
recourse to arms; but, it being term time, the Judges sat, and the
Council pleaded in Westminster Hall in armour. In this general confusion
the Queen came to Guildhall, where she was attended by the Lord Mayor,
Aldermen, Sheriffs, and several of the city companies in their
formalities, to whom she made a long and flattering speech, in which she
professed, that she loved them as a mother loves her child, and that she
would not engage in this marriage, if she thought it inconsistent with
the happiness of her loving subjects: but that she desired to leave
_some fruit of her body_ to be their governor.

This had such an effect, that they cut down the drawbridge, and shut the
gates against Wyat, as he arrived in Southwark; he therefore marched up
the river, crossed the Thames at Kingston, and proceeded through
Westminster to Ludgate; but not being admitted by his friends in the
city, as he expected, he generously surrendered himself, to prevent
bloodshed, and was soon after beheaded on Tower hill.

The rest of this reign exhibited a dreadful scene of religious bigotry,
by a most cruel persecution of the Protestants; for the principal
instance she gave of her tender maternal love to the citizens, was, her
causing many of them to be burnt in Smithfield, in order to put a stop
to the reformation begun by her father, and continued by her brother:
but Providence soon interposed; her reign was short; and the fires which
were then kindled for the holy martyrs, who sealed their faith with
their blood, were the last effort, under the sanction of law, made by
religious tyranny in this kingdom to overthrow the reformation. Happy
would it have been for the Protestants, if this cruel spirit had never
prevailed amongst them; if, upon this change, universal benevolence had
taken place, and every Briton would have allowed his neighbour the same
liberty of enquiry, which he claimed for himself! but though both the
national church and the dissenters from it, have disclaimed the
pretended infallibility they so justly censured in the church of Rome,
and have even constantly owned that they themselves are fallible, yet,
contrary to the mild, the humane spirit of the Gospel, they have
absurdly persecuted those who would not allow them to be infallible, and
have presumed to differ from the unerring standard of their judgment!

We are now come to the period when our streets were no longer to be
crouded with monks and friars of various orders, and in very different
and uncouth habits, walking with their heads shaven and bare, with long
beards, and a rosary hanging at their girdles; when our nobility and
gentry were to be no longer affronted in the streets by Cardinals,
attended by a great retinue of servants: by the lordly Knights of
religious orders, or the wealthy Priors of convents: when our streets
were no longer to be adorned with crosses and the images of the saints,
the objects of much superstition; and when many of our largest, most
conspicuous, and stately buildings, were no longer to consist of
priories, friaries, nunneries, and guilds of religious fraternities.

Thus the appearance of the city, with respect to its buildings,
ornaments, and inhabitants, received a considerable alteration from the
abolition of popery in these kingdoms; and the reader will probably be
pleased at seeing, at one view, a list of these religious houses, which
will the better enable him to form an idea of the difference between
London at that time and the present.

The priories then were, that of St. John of Jerusalem, near Clerkenwell.

That of the Holy Trinity of Christ church, or Creechurch, within
Aldgate.

That of St. Bartholomew the Great, between Newgate street and West
Smithfield.

The priory or abbey of Bermondsey, Southwark.

The priory of the Knights Templars, in Fleet street. And

The old Temple of Holborn.

The friaries were, that of the crutched or crossed friars, in St.
Olave’s, Hart street.

That of the brethren _de sacca_, or _de pœnitentia Jesu Christi_, in the
Old Jewry.

The Charter house monks, or the house of the Carthusians, between St.
John’s street and Goswell street.

The New Abbey, by East Smithfield.

And that of Westminster Abbey.

The five following were convents of begging friars;

Black friars in Holborn, and

The black friars, Dominicans, or preaching friars, near Ludgate.

The gray friars, or Franciscans, near Newgate.

The Augustine friars, in Broad street.

And the white friars, or Carmelites, in Fleet street.

The convents of women were, that of Clerkenwell.

That of St. Helen, within Bishopsgate.

That of St. Clare, in the Minories.

And that of Holiwell by Shoreditch.

The guilds or fraternities were, the brotherhood of St. Fabian and St.
Sebastian, in St. Botolph’s, Aldgate.

The fraternity and chapel of the Holy Trinity, in Leadenhall; and
innumerable others, founded in most churches.

In the reign of Queen Elizabeth, the far greatest part of this
metropolis was contained within the walls, and even in these narrow
limits were many gardens, which have been since converted into lanes,
courts, and alleys. The buildings of London were, on the west, bounded
by the monastery of St. Catharine’s; East Smithfield was open to Tower
hill, and Rosemary lane was unbuilt. The Minories were built only on the
east side, which fronted the city wall: cattle grazed in Goodman’s
Fields, and Whitechapel extended but a little beyond the bars, and had
no houses to the north; for Spitalfields, which of themselves would now
compose a very large town, were then really fields, separated from each
other by hedges and rows of trees. Houndsditch consisted only of a row
of houses fronting the city wall, and the little yards and gardens
behind them also opened into those fields. Bishopsgate street, Norton
Falgate, and the street called Shoreditch, were then however built as
far as the church, but there were only a few houses and gardens on each
side, and no streets or lanes on either hand. Moorfields lay entirely
open to the village of Hoxton; and Finsbury Fields, in which were
several windmills, extended to the east side of Whitecross street.
Chiswell street was not erected, and St. John’s street extended by the
side of the priory of St. John of Jerusalem, to the monastery of
Clerkenwell, and Cow Cross, which opened into the fields.

But on leaving the city walls, the buildings were much less extensive;
for though the village of Holborn was now joined to London, the backs of
the houses, particularly on the north side, opened into gardens and
fields; part of Gray’s Inn lane were the only houses that extended
beyond the main street; great part of High Holborn had no existence, and
St. Giles’s was a village contiguous to no part of London.

If we turn to the Strand, we also find, that spacious street had gardens
on each side, and to the north, fields behind those gardens, except a
few houses where is now the west end of Drury lane. On the south side of
the street, the gardens generally extended to the Thames; though some of
the nobility had houses on the back of their gardens, next the water
side. Covent Garden, so called from its belonging to the convent at
Westminster, extended to St. Martin’s lane, and the field behind it
reached to St. Giles’s. That lane had few edifices besides the church;
for Covent Garden wall was on one side, and a wall which inclosed the
Mews, on the other, and all the upper part was a lane between two
hedges, which extended a little to the west of the village of St.
Giles’s. Hedge lane was also a lane between two hedges; the extensive
street now called the Hay Market, had a hedge on one side, and a few
bushes on the other. Neither Pall Mall, St. James’s street, Piccadilly,
or any of the streets or fine squares in that part of the town, were
built; and Westminster was a small town on the south west, and south
sides of St. James’s Park.

Lambeth was, at that time, a little village at a considerable distance
from Southwark, and there were no buildings on the south bank of the
Thames, till a row of houses began opposite to White Friars, and
extended along the river, with gardens, fields, or groves behind them,
till almost opposite the Steel Yard, where several streets began: the
Borough extended a considerable distance from the bridge to the south,
and the buildings to the east as far as the Tower.

This was the state of this great metropolis, so lately as in the reign
of Queen Elizabeth; and how inconsiderable soever it must appear, when
compared with its present dimensions, yet, by order of that Queen, a
proclamation was published, by which all persons were forbid to build
upon new foundations, and this order was twice repeated in the following
reign.

On the 1st of January 1559, the Litany, as now used, was first read in
all the churches of London; and about this time the populace not only
destroyed all the statues and pictures of the saints in the churches,
but most of their rich robes, altar cloths, books, and sepulchral
banners.

In the year 1582, expence in dress having prevailed in the city, among
people of all ranks, particularly among apprentices, which was then
apprehended might prove of dangerous consequence to their masters, the
following orders were published by the Lord Mayor and Common Council,
which will be now thought very extraordinary, viz. That from thence
forward no apprentice whatsoever should presume,

To wear any apparel but what he receives from his master.

To wear no hat within the city and liberty thereof, nor any thing
instead of it but a woollen cap, without any silk about it.

To wear no ruffles, cuffs, loose collar, nor any thing more than a ruff
at the collar, and that only of a yard and a half long.

To wear no doublets but what were made of canvas, sackcloth, fustian,
English leather, or woollen cloth, without being enriched in any manner
with gold, silver, or silk.

To wear no other coloured cloth or kersey, in hose or stockings, than
white, blue, or russet.

To wear little breeches of the same stuffs as the doublets, without
being stitched, laced, or bordered.

To wear a plain upper coat of cloth or leather, without pinking,
stitching, guarding, lace, or silk about it.

To wear no other surtout than a cloth gown or cloak, lined or faced with
cloth, cotton, or bays, with a fixed round collar, without stitching,
guarding, lace, or silk.

To wear no pumps, slippers, nor shoes, but of English leather, without
being pinked, edged, or stitched; nor girdles nor garters except of
crewel, woollen, thread, or leather, without being garnished.

And to wear no sword, dagger, or other weapon, but a knife; nor neither
a ring, nor a jewel, gold, silver, nor silk in any part of his apparel.

Rigorous as these laws were, and unsufferable as they would be now
thought, yet any apprentice offending against any of the above
particulars, was, for the first offence, to be punished at the
discretion of his master; for the second he was to be publickly whipped
at the hall of his company; and for the third, to serve six months
longer than specified in his indentures. And every master conniving at
his apprentice’s violating the above severe decree, was to forfeit 6s.
8d. to the poor of the parish in which he dwelt.

The plague, which had broke out many times in the reign of Queen
Elizabeth, appeared afresh in 1603, on the accession of King James I. to
the throne, and made such dreadful devastation, that, within the space
of a year, it swept away 30,578 persons: but it having at length happily
ceased, the King, Queen, and Prince Henry, made their public entry from
the Tower on the 15th of March 1604, on which occasion the city was
embellished with seven magnificent triumphal arches, numerous pageants,
and other pompous decorations. The streets were adorned with the richest
silks and carpets, and lined with the stands of the several
corporations, with their flags and bands of music.

In the year 1608, King James I. granted the city a charter, by which he
not only confirmed all the ancient rights, liberties, and immunities of
the citizens, but added to the bounds and jurisdiction of the city the
precincts of Duke’s Place, St. Bartholomew’s the Great and Less, Black
and White Friars, and Cold Harbour. That King also granted the city two
other charters.

In 1613, the water of the New River, brought from Ware by the great Sir
Hugh Middleton, was let into the lower reservoir at Islington, with
great ceremony: the next year Smithfield was first paved, and in 1615,
the sides of the streets of this city being paved with pebble stones,
which had hitherto rendered walking very troublesome, the inhabitants of
the principal streets first began to pave their doors with broad free
stone and flags.

In the year 1625, when King Charles I. ascended the throne, a most
dreadful pestilence raged in London; the fatal effects of this distemper
had been frequently felt; but it now carried off, within the space of a
year, in the city and suburbs, 35,417 persons, besides those who died of
other distempers, which, in the whole, amounted to 54,265, said to be
one third of the inhabitants.

It is remarkable that in the year 1629, the goldsmiths shops in the
south row of Cheapside, reached from the Old Change to Buckler’s Bury,
exclusive of only four shops of other trades in all that space; but
these four shops gave King Charles I. and his Privy Council such
offence, that they sent an order to the Lord Mayor and Aldermen,
commanding them to turn out the tenants, and to oblige all the
goldsmiths in the city, to settle in Cheapside and Lombard street. This
arbitrary order however not being complied with, several others were
sent, both by the Council and the court of Star-chamber, in which they
were commanded to commit the tenants to prison, if they refused to give
security to quit their houses by a certain day: and the court of
Star-chamber even threatened the Alderman of the ward, that if he or his
deputy did not immediately cause every such shop to be shut up, he or
his deputy should be sent to prison, by warrant from the Board.

In 1633, King Charles I. being returned from his progress into Scotland,
the gentlemen of the four Inns of Court entertained their Majesties with
a pompous masque, which excelled every thing of the kind that had been
seen in England, the expence amounting to 21,000l. the greatest sum
probably ever expended in this kingdom in mere shew, except at a
coronation; we shall therefore give it our readers, as a specimen of the
taste of the times; the following account being the more curious, as
these kinds of entertainments are now entirely laid aside.

The masquers, musicians, and all who were actors, met on Candlemas day
in the afternoon, at Ely House in Holborn, where the Committee for the
management of it sat all day, and in the evening they set forward, in
the following order, down Chancery lane to Whitehall.

The march began with twenty footmen in scarlet liveries, trimmed with
silver lace, each having his sword by his side, a baton in one hand, and
a lighted torch in the other. These were the Marshal’s men, who cleared
the streets, and were about the Marshal, waiting his commands. After
them, and sometimes in the midst of them, came Mr. Darrel the Marshal, a
very handsome gentleman, of Lincoln’s Inn, mounted upon one of the
King’s best horses, and richest saddles. He was magnificently dressed,
and, besides his Marshal’s men, had two lacquies who carried torches,
and a page in livery carrying his cloak.

He was followed by an hundred of the handsomest young gentlemen of the
Inns of Court, twenty-five chosen out of each house, all of them mounted
on the best horses, and with the best furniture that the King’s stables,
and those of all the noblemen in town could afford. These hundred
gentlemen were so richly dressed, that scarce any thing but gold and
silver lace could be seen, and every one of them had two lacquies, in
his own livery, carrying torches by his horse’s side, and a page
carrying his cloak. These gentlemen had about a dozen of the best
trumpeters, in their own livery, sounding before them.

After this noble troop, came the antimasquers; preceded by the sound of
keys and tongs, playing in concert. The first antimasque consisted of
beggars and cripples, mounted on the poorest leanest jades that could be
got out of the dust carts or elsewhere, a change, which from the
nobleness of the music, the fineness of the horses, and the magnificent
appearance of the gentlemen, afforded a very odd and surprizing
contrast; the habits and every thing belonging to these cripples and
beggars being ingeniously fitted by the direction of the commissioners,
among whom were Mr. Attorney Noy, Sir John Finch, Sir Edward Herbert,
and Mr. Selden.

After the beggars antimasque, came men on horseback, playing upon pipes,
whistles, and instruments, imitating the notes of all sorts of birds,
and playing in excellent concert.

These were followed by an antimasque of birds, consisting of an owl in
an ivy bush, with many different sorts of birds, in a cluster gazing
upon her; these were little boys put in covers in the shape of those
birds, nicely fitted, sitting on small horses, with footmen going before
them with torches in their hands, and others to look after them, to
prevent their falling.

After this antimasque, came other musicians on horseback, playing upon
bagpipes and other kinds of Northern music, to shew that the following
projectors were Scots; and these, like the rest, had many footmen with
torches waiting on them.

First in this antimasque rode a fellow upon a little horse with a great
bit in his mouth, carrying upon his head a bit with a headstall and
reins; a projector, who begged a patent, that none in the kingdom might
ride their horses, without such bits as they should buy of him.

Then came another fellow with a capon upon his fist, and a bunch of
carrots upon his head, representing a projector, who begged a patent of
monopoly, as the first inventor of the art of feeding capons fat with
carrots.

Several other projectors were personated in this antimasque, which
pleased the spectators the more, because an information was thus
covertly given to the King, of the unfitness and ridiculousness of these
projects against the law. The Attorney Noy, who had most knowledge of
them, had a great hand in this antimasque of the projectors.

After this and the rest of the antimasques, came six of the chief
musicians on horseback upon foot-cloths, and in the habits of Heathen
priests, footmen carrying torches by their sides. These were followed by
a large open chariot, drawn by six fine horses with large plumes of
feathers on their heads and cruppers. In this chariot were about a dozen
persons, in the habits of Gods and Goddesses, many footmen walking an
all sides with torches.

This chariot was followed by six more of the musicians on horseback,
dressed and attended with torches like the former, proceeding before
another large open chariot, drawn by six fine horses, with feathers,
liveries, and torches, like the other. Within it were twelve musicians,
as variously dressed as the others, to represent, like them, Pagan
deities. These chariots were made for this occasion, and, preceding the
grand masquers chariots, played upon excellent loud music all the way.

After this chariot came six more musicians, dressed and attended like
the former, followed by the first chariot of the grand masquers, which
was not so large as those that went before, but was curiously carved and
painted. It was in the form of a Roman triumphal chariot, and richly
painted with crimson and silver all over, not excepting the wheels. It
was drawn by four horses all in a breast, covered to the heels with
crimson and silver tissue, and with huge plumes of red and white
feathers on their heads and cruppers. The coachman’s cap and feather,
his long coat, his cushion, and his very whip, were of the same stuff
and colour. In this chariot sat the four grand masquers of Gray’s Inn,
who were handsome young gentlemen. Their habits, doublets, trunk hose
and caps, were of the richest tissue, covered as thick with silver
spangles as they could be placed; large white silk stockings up to their
trunk hose, and very fine sprigs in their caps.

On each side of the chariot were four footmen, in liveries of the colour
of the chariot, carrying huge flambeaus, which, with the torches, gave
the greatest lustre to the paintings, spangles and habits.

After this chariot came six more musicians, in habits like the former,
followed by the second chariot, which differed only from the other in
its being painted silver and blue. The chariot and horses were covered
with tissue of blue and silver, as the former was with silver and
crimson.

In this second triumphal chariot were four grand masquers of the Middle
Temple, in the same habits as the other masquers, and had the like
attendance, torches and flambeaus, as the former.

After these followed the third and fourth triumphal chariots, with six
musicians between each; both they and their horses dressed as before.
The triumphal chariots were all of the same make, and alike carved and
painted, only differing in the colours. In the third of these chariots
rode the grand masquers of the Inner Temple, and in the fourth those of
Lincoln’s Inn; each taking the place assigned them by lot.

In this order they proceeded to Whitehall, where the King and Queen,
from a window of the Banquetting house, beheld this procession, and were
so highly delighted with it, that the King sent to desire the Marshal to
take a turn round the Tilt Yard, that he and his consort might have a
second view of this pompous procession; which being accordingly
performed, they entered the palace, and were conducted to several
apartments prepared for their entertainment; where the Ladies of honour,
and even the Queen herself, danced with the principal masquers.

With this fine cavalcade her Majesty was so delighted, that she desired
to have it repeated, which being intimated to the Lord Mayor, he invited
the King and Queen, with the above masquers, to an entertainment in
Merchant Taylors Hall; and on this occasion they came in procession into
the city, in exactly the same order, and with equal splendor and
applause as at Whitehall. _Whitlock’s Memoirs._

During this unhappy reign, great disputes arose between the King and the
city, in relation to ship-money, loans, &c. the city was deprived not
only of the new plantation of Ulster in Ireland, which had been granted
to the Lord Mayor and citizens by King James I. but fined 50,000l.
Several of the Aldermen were imprisoned, for neglecting to send to court
an account of such persons as were able to lend his Majesty money, and
the Lord Mayor and Sheriffs prosecuted in the Star-chamber; the five
members whom the King himself went with a guard to seize in the
Parliament House, took refuge in the city, and were conducted back by
water to the House of Commons, by a great number of citizens, while the
Trained-Bands, as a farther guard, marched by land to Westminster. But
even in the midst of these disputes, while the King was actually
opposing the liberties of the citizens, he granted them several
charters, by which he confirmed all their former privileges, and added
some new ones. At length the Lord Mayor, contrary to an order of
Parliament, endeavouring by proclamation to raise troops for his
Majesty, he was committed to the Tower; and several articles of
impeachment being brought against him, he was, by the sentence of the
House of Peers, degraded from the Mayoralty, and rendered incapable of
bearing any office, or receiving any farther honour.

There being some time after but little prospect of an agreement between
the King and Parliament, and the greatest part of the city being averse
to all thoughts of an accommodation, the Common Council passed an act
for fortifying the city with out-works; agreed that all the ways leading
to the city should be shut up, except those entering at Charing Cross,
St. Giles’s in the Fields, St. John’s street, Shoreditch, and
Whitechapel, and that the exterior ends of those streets should be
fortified with breastworks and turnpikes, musket proof; that the several
courts of guards, and rails at the extreme parts of the liberty of the
city, should be fortified with turnpikes, musket proof; that all the
sheds and buildings contiguous to the outside of London Wall should be
taken down; and that the city wall with its bulwarks should be not only
repaired and mounted with artillery, but that several new works should
be added to it, at the places most exposed.

This act of Common Council being soon after confirmed by an order of
Parliament, the following forts were raised, 1. A bulwark and a half, at
the north end of Gravel lane. 2. A hornwork, near the windmill in
Whitechapel road. 3. A redoubt with two flanks, near Brick lane. 4. A
redoubt with four flanks, in Hackney road, Shoreditch. 5. A redoubt with
four flanks, in Kingsland road. 6. A battery and breast-work, at
Mountmill. 7. A battery and breast-work, at the end of St. John’s
street. 8. A small redoubt, near Islington pound. 9. A large fort with
four half bulwarks, near New River head. 10. A battery and breast-work,
on the hill, east of the place afterwards called Black Mary’s Hole. 11.
Two batteries and a breast-work, at Southampton, now Bedford-house. 12.
A redoubt with two flanks, near St. Giles’s pound. 13. A small fort, at
the east end of Tyburn road. 14. A large fort with four half bulwarks,
across the road where Wardour street is now built. 15. A small bulwark,
at the place now called Oliver’s Mount. 16. A large fort with four
bulwarks, at Hyde Park Corner. 17. A small redoubt and battery on
Constitution Hill. 18. A court of guard at Chelsea turnpike. 19. A
battery and breast-work, in Tothill Fields. 20. A quadrant fort with
four half bulwarks, at Vauxhall. 21. A fort with four half bulwarks, at
the Dog and Duck in St. George’s Fields. 22. A large fort with four
bulwarks, near the end of Blackman street. 23. A redoubt with four
flanks, near the Lock Hospital.

These forts were all joined by a line of communication, formed by a
rampart of earth, which on all sides surrounded the cities of London and
Westminster, and the borough of Southwark, This was done at the expence
of the city, and the whole was immediately executed with the greatest
alacrity.

After this, the city entered heartily into the measures of the
Parliament, though the Lord Mayor, Aldermen, and Common Council
frequently sollicited that body to settle the peace of the kingdom: but
soon after the King’s death, an order being sent to the Lord Mayor and
Sheriff, to proclaim the abolition of monarchy, he refused to comply,
upon which he was brought to the bar of the House of Commons, committed
prisoner to the Tower for two months, and another Mayor chosen in his
room.

At the inauguration of Cromwell in 1657, as Lord Protector, the Lord
Mayor carried the city sword before him, accompanied by the Earl of
Warwick, who carried the sword of state, and during the ceremony stood
on the right side of Cromwell’s chair, while the Lord Mayor stood on the
left.

But after the death of Cromwell, the Common Council opposing the
Committee of Safety, declaring for a free Parliament, and refusing to
pay or advance money to the Parliament, General Monk was ordered to
march with his army into the city, and the streets became planted with
soldiers; when several of the Aldermen and Common Council were taken
into custody, the whole body disqualified, and a new Common Council
ordered to be chosen; after which the city gates were broke and cut to
pieces, the portcullises taken down and destroyed, and the posts and
chains taken down.

After this, the city heartily and zealously joined with General Monk, in
bringing about the restoration. The Lord Mayor and Aldermen, on the 29th
of May 1660, went out to meet Charles II. in St. George’s Fields, where
the city had erected a magnificent pavilion, provided with a sumptuous
collation, of which that Prince having participated, was conducted
through the city by a very noble cavalcade, the Lord Mayor carrying the
sword bare-headed before the King, accompanied by the Duke of Buckingham
and General Monk, who were also bare. Upon this occasion the city was
adorned with the richest silks and tapestries, and the streets lined
with the city corporations and Trained Bands, while the conduits flowed
with wine, and the windows, balconies, and scaffolds were crouded with
an infinite number of spectators.

In the year 1663, King Charles II. granted the city a confirmation of
all their former charters, privileges, liberties, rights and customs;
and the next year the city, in return, advanced several considerable
sums for his Majesty, to enable him to carry on a war with the Dutch,
for which the citizens received the thanks of both Houses of Parliament.

About the beginning of May 1665, one of the most terrible plagues that
ever was inflicted on this, or perhaps any other kingdom, broke out in
this city: and as this was happily the last visitation of this kind, it
may be proper to give a short account of its rise and progress.

The week wherein this most dreadful distemper was first discovered, it
carried off nine persons, whereby the citizens were so greatly alarmed,
that an universal dread diffused itself amongst people of all ranks: but
the week after, the number, according to the bill of mortality, being
reduced to three, the fears of the citizens were greatly alleviated. The
next week, however, the number increasing to fourteen, and progressively
to forty-three, the people were struck with consternation, and many of
them had thoughts of leaving the city: but in the month of June, the
number having gradually increased to 470 a week, the nobility, gentry,
and principal citizens fled for safety, all being instantly in an
amazing hurry, and the city emptying itself into the country, the
streets and roads were excessively crouded with carriages and
passengers. In July the bill increasing to 2010, all houses were shut
up, the streets deserted, and scarce any thing to be seen therein but
grass growing, innumerable fires made to purify the air, coffins,
pest-carts, red crosses upon doors, with the inscription of _Lord, have
mercy upon us!_ and poor women in tears, with dismal aspects, and woeful
lamentations, carrying their infants to the grave! and scarce any other
sounds to be heard than those incessantly repeated from the windows,
_Pray for us!_ and the dismal call of, _Bring out your dead!_ with the
groans of the dying, and the melancholy tolling of bells for bodies
ready for the grave! But what greatly added to this distressful scene,
was, the spectator’s own reflections, that he himself should perhaps
soon make one among the dismal objects, whose groans resounded in his
ears.

Under these deplorable circumstances, the citizens, when in the greatest
want of spiritual guides, were forsaken by their parochial Ministers,
when those who had been just before ejected from the pulpits,
considering their indispensible duty in this dreadful visitation, were
induced, though contrary to law, to supply their place; upon which the
people, laying aside the distinction of churchmen and dissenters,
joyfully resorted to church, where the concourse was so exceeding great,
that these non-conformist Ministers were frequently obliged to clamber
over the pews to get to the pulpit; and if ever preaching had a better
effect than ordinary, it was at this time, when the people listened with
the utmost eagerness, and attended as if their salvation depended upon
every word they heard.

In the month of September Death rode triumphant, for the burials then
amounted in one week to 6988; but the week after the bill falling to
6544, gave some glimmering hopes that this dreadful distemper was past
its crisis: however, the great increase the week following to 7165,
re-immerged the survivors into an abyss of horror and despair; for now
they were struck with the dreadful apprehensions, that in a few days the
living would not be sufficient to bury the dead. They were, however,
happily mistaken; for after this, the contagion gradually decreased,
till it pleased the Almighty to restore this desolate city to its
pristine state of health; after the direful ravages of this distemper
had swept off 68,596 persons, which, together with those who died of
other diseases, made the bill of mortality for this year amount to
97,306. _Echard’s Hist._ _Vincent’s God’s terrible voice._

As to the natural causes of this pestilence, Physicians differ greatly;
however, Dr. Baynard observes, that during the havock made by it, there
was a general calmness and serenity of weather, without the least wind
or rain; that through the great scarcity of nitre in the air, the fires
in the streets were with great difficulty made to burn; and by its
extreme rarefaction, which was doubtless increased by these fires, the
birds panted for breath, and those of the larger sort were observed to
fly more heavily than usual.

The above calamity was scarcely ceased, and those who had fled returned
to their houses, when on Sunday the 2d of September 1666, a dreadful
fire broke out at one in the morning, in the house of Mr. Farryner, a
baker, in Pudding lane; a time when the eyes and senses of all were
locked in sleep. The house was a wooden building pitched on the outside,
as were all the rest in the lane, which was exceeding narrow, and by the
jutting over of the several stories, the buildings on each side almost
met at the top; and in this manner were built most of the houses in this
metropolis. The house in which the fire began, containing much brush and
faggot wood, the fire soon got ahead, and furiously seized on the
neighbouring houses on all sides, running four ways at once; it
presently set New Fish street all in a flame; while another branch
raging down Pudding lane, laid hold on Thames street, the repository of
all combustibles, as hemp, flax, rosin, oil, butter, pitch, tar,
brimstone, cordage, hops, sugar, brandy, wood, and coals; where dividing
itself, it ran both eastward and westward with inexpressible fury, into
the adjacent lanes, consuming all before it; and its two main branches
meeting at London bridge, soon reduced all the buildings upon it to
ashes, together with the water engines under it; by which means the
people were deprived of the assistance of that element; for the New
River water was not then laid into those parts.

The pulling down houses every way, at some distance, was first proposed;
and this was the only method that could have been of any service in
stopping the progress of the flames; for had there been water, the fire
was too fierce to be mastered by engines, or to suffer any body to work
near it; but this was objected to, and while the affair was debated, the
flames spread still farther.

Unhappily they were increased by a violent easterly wind; and that day
and the following night spread up Gracechurch street, and downwards from
Cannon street to the water side, as far as the Three Cranes.

The people in all parts were distracted at seeing the progress of the
fire, and by the care of carrying off their goods. However, many
attempts were now made to prevent its spreading, by pulling down houses,
and making great intervals; but not having time to remove the materials,
the fire seized upon the timber, boards, laths, and rubbish, and
extended itself over these spaces to the neighbouring houses; raging in
a bright flame all Monday and Tuesday, without any endeavours to stop it
proving effectual; though his Majesty, the Duke of York, and great
numbers of the nobility and gentry came with the guards, who were
employed in endeavouring to extinguish it.

The wind, however, slackened a little on Tuesday night, when the fire,
meeting at the Temple with brick buildings, it by little and little lost
its force on that side, so that on Wednesday morning a stop was put to
it on the west, at the Temple church, and also at Holborn bridge and Pye
corner. On the north, it stopped at Aldersgate, Cripplegate, near the
north end of Basinghall street, and in Coleman street: on the east, at
the south corner of Bishopsgate street and Leadenhall street, at the
church in Fenchurch street, and at the Tower dock, after its having
consumed all the buildings within these limits, quite down to the water
side.

On Thursday the flames were extinguished; but that evening the fire
burst out again at the Temple, by the falling of some sparks upon a pile
of wooden buildings; but upon blowing up the houses around it with
gunpowder, it was extinguished the next morning.

By this dreadful conflagration were consumed 400 streets and lanes,
13,200 houses, the cathedral church of St. Paul, 86 parish churches, 6
chapels, the Royal Exchange, Blackwell Hall, and the Custom House,
several hospitals and libraries, 52 of the Companies halls, and a vast
number of other stately edifices, together with three of the city gates,
four stone bridges, and four prisons; the loss of which, with that of
the merchandize and houshold furniture, amounted, according to the best
calculation, to ten millions, seven hundred and thirty thousand, five
hundred pounds: but it is amazing, that in this terrible devastation,
only six persons lost their lives by the fire.

As by the dreadful ravages of the plague the preceding year, the city
was depopulated, and the houses deprived of their inhabitants, so by
this conflagration the surviving citizens were deprived of their
habitations, and many thousands of them compelled to retire to the
fields, with such of their effects as they were able to save, where they
continued destitute of the conveniencies, and almost all the necessary
accommodations of life; lying in the open air, till tents and slight
wooden huts could be erected, to secure them from the inclemencies of
the weather. Meanwhile the King had the goodness to order a considerable
quantity of naval bread to be immediately distributed among the poor,
and a proclamation was wisely published, ordering the neighbouring
Justices to encourage the bringing in of all sorts of provisions.

It has been much disputed, whether this dismal catastrophe was
occasioned by accident or design. An attempt was first made to fix it
upon the dissenters, who suffered as much by this calamity, as any other
body of men; but having not the least colour for such a pretence, it
dropped of course; and the English being then at war with the French and
the Dutch, the latter were charged with concerting this diabolical
scheme; but this was found to be only an injurious aspersion: however,
Robert Hubert, a Frenchman, of the Romish church, confessed, that he, at
the sollicitation of one Stephen Piedloe, set fire to the baker’s house
in Pudding lane, by means of a fire-ball which he fixed to the end of a
long pole, and lighting it a match, put it in at a window; and that for
this villainy he was to be rewarded on his return to France; but it is
generally allowed, that this man was at that time disordered in his
senses; and great pains have been taken to prove that he had no hand in
that calamity: however, he was condemned and executed, though he
surrendered himself, and though there was no other evidence of his guilt
than that of his own confession.

It is observable, that the preceding spring and summer had been the
dryest in the memory of man; whereby the houses, which were all built of
wood, and without party walls, were prepared, as it were, by Heaven, to
become fuel for this terrible conflagration, which, together with the
east wind abovementioned, might possibly be alone sufficient to reduce
the city to a heap of ashes.

But whatever the unhappy citizens of London might then suffer; it is
evident, that this was one of the greatest blessings that could have
happened for the good of posterity; for, instead of very narrow and
incommodious streets; instead of dark, irregular, and ill contrived
wooden houses, with their several stories projecting over, obstructing
the circulation of the air, and harbouring those noxious particles that
occasioned the frequent return of the plague, and often fires of the
most dreadful kind; by the modern way of building, and the enlarging of
many of the streets, offensive vapours are expelled; and this, added to
the cleanliness produced by the great quantities of the water brought
into London by the New River, has freed this city from all pestilential
symptoms for above ninety years together.

The reduction of this great and opulent city to a heap of rubbish,
greatly affected the whole nation; and the King desiring it should be
now erected with greater magnificence, uniformity, and safety than
before, prohibited for some time the rebuilding of the houses; and the
Judges were ordered by Parliament to hear and determine all disputes
between landlords, tenants, and lessees, concerning the rebuilding and
repairing of houses, &c. without fee or reward.

London indeed might now have been rebuilt in such a manner, as to have
exceeded in beauty all the cities upon earth; and this would have been
the case, had either of the following plans been followed. The first was
formed by Sir Christopher Wren, who, pursuant to the royal commands,
traced over the great plain of ashes and ruins, and thence formed his
plan of a new city, free from all the deformities and inconveniencies of
the old one; by enlarging the streets and lanes, and rendering them as
nearly parallel to each other as possible; by seating all the parish
churches in a conspicuous manner; by forming the most public places into
large piazzas, the centers of eight ways; by uniting the halls of the
twelve Companies into one regular square annexed to Guildhall; by making
a spacious and commodious key along the whole bank of the river, without
any interruptions, from Black Friars to the Tower, with some large docks
for barges deep laden.

The streets were to be of three magnitudes; the three principal leading
straight through the city, and one or two cross streets to be at least
ninety feet wide; others sixty feet, and the lanes about thirty feet,
excluding all narrow dark alleys, thoroughfairs, and courts.

The Exchange to stand free in the middle of a piazza, and to be the
center of the town, from whence the streets should proceed to all the
principal parts of the city; the building to be after the form of a
Roman forum, with double porticos.

Many streets were also to radiate upon the bridge. Those of the first
and second magnitude to be carried on as straight as possible, and to
center in four or five areas surrounded with piazzas.

The churches were to be designed according to the best forms for
capacity and hearing; and those of the larger parishes adorned with
porticos and lofty ornamental towers and steeples: but all church yards,
gardens, and unnecessary vacuities, and all trades that use great fires,
or yield noisome smells, were to be placed out of the town.

This plan, which that great architect laid before the King and the House
of Commons, is thus explained: from that part of Fleet street which
remained unburned, a straight street of 90 feet wide was to extend, and,
passing by the south side of Ludgate, was to end gracefully in a piazza
on Tower hill.

In the middle of Fleet street was to be a circular area surrounded with
a piazza, the center of eight ways, where, at one station, were to meet
the following streets.

The first, straight forward, quite thro’ the city: the second, obliquely
towards the right hand, to the beginning of the key that was to be run
from Bridewell dock to the Tower: the third, obliquely on the left, to
Smithfield: the fourth, straight on the right, to the Thames: the fifth,
straight on the left, to Hatton Garden and Clerkenwell: the sixth,
straight backwards to Temple Bar: the seventh, obliquely on the right,
to the walks of the Temple: and the eighth, obliquely on the left, to
Cursitor’s alley.

Passing down Fleet street, at the bottom of which the ditch was to be
rendered a beautiful canal, passable by as many bridges as there were
streets to cross it, and leaving Ludgate prison on the left side of the
street; where a triumphal arch was to be formed, instead of the gate, in
honour of King Charles II. the founder of the new city: St. Paul’s was
to be situated where it is at present, and surrounded by a triangular
piazza.

On leaving that cathedral on the left, a straight street was to extend
directly to the Tower, adorned all the way, at proper distances, with
parish churches; and leaving that edifice to the right, the other great
branch was to lead to the Royal Exchange, which was to be seated in the
middle of a piazza, between two great streets; the one from Ludgate
leading to the south front, and another from Holborn, thro’ Newgate, and
thence straight to the north front of the Exchange.

This noble scheme was demonstrated to be practicable, without the
infringement of any man’s property; for, by leaving out the
church-yards, &c. which were to be removed out of town, there would have
been sufficient room both for the augmentation of the streets, the
disposition of the churches, halls, and all public buildings, and to
have given every proprietor full satisfaction: for though few of them
would have been seated upon exactly the very same ground they possessed
before the fire, yet none would have been thrust at any considerable
distance from it: but the obstinacy of great part of the citizens, in
refusing to recede from the right, of rebuilding their houses on the old
foundations, was an unsurmountable obstacle to the execution of this
noble scheme. _Parentalia._

Soon after this, Sir John Evelyn produced another plan, in which he
proposed that some of the deepest vallies should be filled up, or at
least made with less sudden declivities. That a new and spacious key
should run from the Tower to the Temple, and extend itself as far as the
low water mark; by which means the channel of the river would be kept
constantly full; the irregularity and deformity of the stairs, and the
dirt and nastiness left at every ebb would also be prevented.

To create variety in the streets, he also proposed, that there should be
breaks and enlargements, by spacious openings at proper distances,
surrounded with piazzas, and uniformly built with beautiful fronts; and
that some of these openings should be square, some circular, and others
oval. He would have none of the principal streets less than an hundred
feet in breadth, nor any of the narrowest less than thirty. He would
have three or four large streets between the Thames and London Wall,
reckoning that of Cheapside for the chief, which might extend from
Temple Bar to the upper part of Tower hill, or to Crutched Friars,
bearing the cathedral of St. Paul’s upon a noble eminence.

Among these he would have the parochial churches, which he thought might
be reduced to half the number, as some of the parishes were then no less
than two hundred times larger than others: and these he would have so
interspersed as to adorn the profile of the city at all its avenues.
Most of them he would have in the center of spacious areas, adorned with
piazzas, &c. so as to be seen from several streets, and others at the
abutments and extremities of them.

About the church piazzas, the stationers and booksellers were to have
their shops, and the Ministers their houses; as about that of St. Paul’s
was to be the episcopal palace, the Dean and Prebends houses, St. Paul’s
school, a public library, the prerogative and first fruits office, all
which were to be built at an ample distance from the cathedral, and with
more stately fronts, in honour of that august pile. In some of these
openings, surrounded with piazzas, he proposed to have the several
markets. In others the coaches might wait; and in some might be public
fountains constantly playing.

The College of Physicians he would have in one of the best parts of the
town, incircled with a handsome piazza, for the dwellings of those
learned persons, with the surgeons, apothecaries, and druggists in the
streets about them; for he would have all of a mystery in the same
quarters: those of the better sort of the shopkeepers in the sweetest
and most eminent streets and piazzas; and the artificers in the more
ordinary houses, in the intermediate and narrow passages; the taverns
and victualling houses were to be placed amongst them, and be built
accordingly; but so as to preserve the most perfect uniformity.

Between the piazzas, market places, and churches, might be placed the
halls for the Companies; and these, if fronted with stone, and adorned
with statues and other ornaments, would infinitely inrich the streets,
and render this city as famous for architecture of the most refined
gusto, as any city in Europe; among which should be distinguished
Guildhall, by its being more pompous and magnificent than the rest: near
this edifice he would have a magnificent house for the Lord Mayor, and
others for the two Sheriffs.

The Royal Exchange he thought might front the Thames about the
Steelyard, in an area surrounded on three sides with piazzas, with
vaults for warehouses underneath; and for such merchandize as could not
be well preserved under ground, might be erected buildings fronting the
Thames on the other side of the river, with wharfs before and yards
behind for the placing of cranes; the laying of timber, coals, &c. and
other gross commodities, while the key over against it should be built
for the owners, and the dwellings of the principal merchants: but if the
warehouses must needs be on this side, they should be made to front
Thames street rather than the river, because of the dull and heavy
aspect of those buildings.

The little bay at Queenhithe should have the key continued around it,
and cloistered about for the marketmen and fruiterers; and where the
wharf then was, a stately avenue was to extend to St. Paul’s.

Four great streets were to extend along the city: the first from Fleet
ditch, (which was to be formed into a noble canal) to the Tower: the
second, from the Strand to the most eastern part of the city, where
should be a noble triumphal arch in honour of Charles II. the third,
from Newgate to Aldgate: and the fourth and shortest, from Aldersgate to
Bishopsgate. He proposed that five principal cross streets should extend
from Black Friars stairs into West Smithfield; from the Thames east of
St. Paul’s to Aldersgate; from Queenhithe to Cripplegate; and from the
Royal Exchange to Moorgate: that the street from the bridge should
extend to Bishopsgate: that one from Billingsgate should extend near as
far: and one from the Custom house to Aldgate.

Instead of houses on the bridge, he proposed to have it adorned with a
substantial iron baluster, decorated, at convenient distances, with
statues on their pedestals, with a footway on each side.

The hospitals, workhouses to employ the poor, and the prisons, being
built and re-indowed at the public expence, were to be disposed of in
convenient quarters of the city: the hospitals would become one of the
principal streets; but the prisons, and court for the trial of
criminals, might still be built near the entrances of the city.

The gates were to be in the form of triumphal arches, adorned with
statues, relievos, and apposite inscriptions, not obstructed by sheds,
or mean houses joined to them.

This gentleman also proposed, that along the wall betwixt Cripplegate
and Aldgate, should be the church-yards of the several parishes, while
the houses opposite to them formed a large street for the common inns,
and served as a station for carriers, &c. These being on the north part
of the city, and nearest the confines of the fields and roads, would
least incumber the town; and there would be a far more commodious and
free access to them, by reason of their immediate approaches through the
traverse streets, than if they were scattered up and down without
distinction.

But this scheme, which was designed as an improvement of Sir
Christopher’s, also fell to nothing; and by the obstinacy of the
citizens, the opportunity was lost of rendering this city the admiration
of the world, and thereby of drawing the nobility of all Europe to visit
it, and lay out great sums here.

However, it was ordered by act of Parliament, that many of the streets
and lanes should be widened, and the city was impowered to make a new
street from Cheapside to Guildhall, which obtained the name of King
street, and another from Threadneedle street to Lothbury, called
Prince’s street. And the markets, which till then were held in Newgate
street and Cheapside, were ordered to be removed behind the houses into
commodious market places to be prepared for that purpose. It was also
enacted that all the houses should be built with stone or brick, with
party walls, and the whole finished within three years: that the ground
in several places should be raised, and that a column of brass or stone
should be erected on or near the place where the above dreadful fire
began; whence arose that noble column called the Monument: but had it
been raised near the place where the fire ceased, and in the center of
the fine circular area proposed by Sir Christopher Wren, in Fleet
street, where eight streets would radiate upon it, and where it would be
seen to terminate the view, even from Aldgate and Westminster, it would
have enjoyed a situation vastly more worthy of its beauty, and have
appeared to infinitely greater advantage, than in the corner where it is
now placed. See the article MONUMENT.

The reader has just seen the city under two of the most dreadful
calamities that could fall upon a people, pestilence, and a general
destruction by fire; he will now see the citizens suffering calamities
of a very different kind, and deprived of all their boasted privileges.
This affair it is necessary to trace from its origin.

In the beginning of May 1679, a conspiracy of the papists was
discovered, for destroying the city again by fire, occasioned by the
burning of one Bird’s house in Fetter lane; for Elizabeth Oxley, the
servant, being suspected, was committed to prison; where she not only
confessed the fact, but declared, that she was prevailed upon to fire it
by one Stubbs, a papist, upon the promise of 5l. Stubbs being secured,
confessed that he had been excited to this by Father Gifford, his
confessor, who told him, that instead of its being a sin, it would be a
great service to the church to burn and destroy all the houses of
heretics; and that he had several conferences with Gifford, and two
Irishmen, upon that affair; that an insurrection was to be made in
London, and a powerful army expected from France. Five Jesuits were
executed for this plot, the papists banished from the city, and ten
miles round, and afterwards the Lord Stafford was beheaded for the same
crime.

In revenge, the Romish party trumped up what was called the Meal Tub
plot, to bring an odium upon the presbyterians and the heads of the
country party; but Dangerfield, the chief actor in this farce, being
committed to prison, applied himself to the Lord Mayor, and in an ample
confession laid open the whole scene of iniquity, discovering the
persons who set him to work.

The citizens not only vigorously pressed the prosecution of all the
persons they had reason to think concerned in the popish plot, in
opposition to the court, who endeavoured to skreen them; but the Lord
Mayor, Aldermen, and Common Council presented a petition to his Majesty,
desiring, that all the persons who had been impeached by the Commons,
might be brought to their trials; the Duke of York, as being a papist,
excluded from succeeding to the throne; and the Parliament continued, in
order to make the necessary provisions for the preservation of his
Majesty and his protestant subjects; but this petition not only hastened
the dissolution of the Parliament, but was so highly resented by the
King, that it principally occasioned the loss of all the rights and
privileges belonging to the citizens.

The Parliament being soon after dissolved, and writs issued for a new
election, the citizens chose their former members, and gave them
directions in writing to continue their search into the popish plot; to
promote the bill of exclusion, and to grant no supplies of money till
they had effectually secured them against popery and arbitrary power;
which example was followed by most of the electors of the kingdom.

The court now threw the city into confusion, by interfering in the
election of Sheriffs; those the city had chosen, and one of the
Aldermen, were committed to the Tower; while other Sheriffs were elected
by the Lord Mayor, without the consent of the Commons; and soon after a
_quo warranto_ was brought against the city, contrary to justice, the
charters of the city, and the rights of the citizens: the plea and
rejoinder brought by the citizens, were as full and as nervous, as the
arguments brought to support the information were weak and trifling.
However, the ministry having at all events determined to remove the
sacred fence, and destroy the dear bought privileges of the citizens,
removed the Judges who did not approve these proceedings, and chose
others, who would be more obedient, in their room; and on the 12th of
June 1683, the sentence was pronounced, that the city had given just
ground for the forfeiture of their charter.

After this the King granted the office of Lord Mayor to be held during
pleasure, appointed the Sheriffs, the Recorder, and sixteen of his
favourite Aldermen; degraded eight of those that were in the country
interest, and appointed eight others in their room.

The death of King Charles II. was far from putting a stop to the
arbitrary measures of the court: for James II. immediately singled out
as a sacrifice to popery, Mr. Cornish, an Alderman of this city, who,
when Sheriff, had exerted himself in an uncommon manner in the detection
and prosecution of those concerned in the popish plot. This gentleman
was apprehended, and committed to Newgate, without the use of pen, ink,
or paper, till Saturday noon, when he received notice, that he was to be
tried for high treason on the Monday following. In the interim, his
children humbly petitioned the King for time, that their father might
prepare for his defence: but they petitioned in vain, though the most
material evidence in his favour was then 140 miles from London. He was
indicted the next Monday, for conspiring to raise a rebellion, to
destroy the King, and subvert the constitution in the late reign. The
only material evidences were two persons of an infamous and profligate
character; one of them an outlaw, who was pardoned, and his testimony
made legal, for his appearing against Cornish; and though what he
deposed did not affect the prisoner, he was condemned, and on the 23d of
the same month, hanged, drawn, and quartered before his own door, at the
end of King street, Cheapside.

During this short but iniquitous reign, in which the boldest attempts
were made for extirpating the protestant religion, and the religious and
civil liberties of the people, the citizens and the whole nation cast
their eyes on the Prince of Orange as their deliverer. That Prince’s
resolution to grant them his assistance was no sooner known at
Whitehall, than the deluded, weak, and pusillanimous King, prompted by
fear, sent for the Lord Mayor and Aldermen, and with a meanness of
spirit equal to that of enslaving his people, promised to restore their
charter. Accordingly, on the sixth of October 1688, the infamous and
cruel Lord Chancellor Jeffries brought back the charter to the city.

Upon this, a new Lord Mayor was chosen; the Aldermen restored to their
respective wards; and the Liverymen of the several Companies at the time
when judgment was given against the city upon the _quo warranto_, were
also restored.

It may be proper to observe, before we conclude this reign, that about
the beginning of December 1683, was a severe frost, which continued till
the 5th of February; the Thames being froze, a great number of streets
with shops were erected upon it.

In the year 1687, a dreadful persecution raging in France against the
distressed protestants, 13,500 of them came over and settled in this
city, and the parts contiguous, particularly in Spitalfields, by which
they greatly enriched the city and kingdom, by introducing among us new
arts and manufactures.

As the citizens had contributed very much to the revolution, King
William and Queen Mary were conducted by a noble cavalcade to Guildhall,
where their Majesties and a numerous train of the nobility were
entertained at dinner; and soon after the Parliament reversed the
proceedings of the former reigns on the _quo warranto_, declaring them
to be illegal and arbitrary, and confirmed all the rights and privileges
of the city.

After the peace of Ryswick, King William III. at the desire of the Lord
Mayor and citizens, made his public entry into the city, with great
magnificence, the Lord Mayor carrying the city sword before his Majesty.

In the reign of Queen Anne, her Majesty came several times in great
state to St. Paul’s, to return thanks for the glorious victories of the
great Duke of Marlborough; and after the victory of Blenheim, his Grace,
with the Prince of Hesse and many of the nobility, dined with the Lord
Mayor and Aldermen at Goldsmith’s Hall.

On Friday the 26th of November 1703, happened the most dreadful storm of
wind that perhaps was ever known in any age or nation. For, beginning
about eleven at night, and increasing till about seven in the morning,
it committed the most terrible and amazing devastations, by blowing down
houses, trees, brick walls, and stacks of chimneys; by which many of the
citizens were buried in ruins; a considerable number of whom were
killed, others terribly wounded, while others again were amazingly
preserved unhurt among the rubbish. As an instance of which, it may be
proper to mention the following circumstance: two boys lying in a garret
in the Poultry, a huge stack of chimneys fell in, which making its way
through that and all the other stories to the cellar, it was followed by
the bed with the boys asleep in it, who first awaked in that gloomy
place of confusion, without having suffered the least hurt. Incredible
as this story is, it is nevertheless well attested.

By the impetuosity of this storm, many spires and turrets were
destroyed; upon the churches and other public buildings, the lead was
rolled up like scrolls, and blown to a considerable distance. At the
approach of day, the houses appeared like so many skeletons, and being
mostly stripped, the damage done to the roofs was so great, that the
price of tiles rose from 1l. 1s. to 6l. a thousand.

It is not easy to conceive the surprize that appeared in all
countenances in the morning; for the streets were covered with bricks,
broken tiles, signs, and pest-houses; almost all thoughts of trade were
laid aside, and the principal concern was the immediate repair of their
houses, in order to preserve themselves from the inclemency of the
weather in that rigorous season.

The damage at sea, however, far exceeded that by land; for in that
dreadful night twelve men of war were lost, with above 1800 men on
board; besides the prodigious loss of merchant ships, computed at ten
times the value. At that time the roads near our coast were filled with
ships, especially the Downs, where most of them were swallowed up by the
waves; and even in the Thames, only four from London bridge to
Limehouse, rode it out; for the rest being driven to Limehouse, lay
there, beating against each other, by the irresistible fury of the
tempest, by which they suffered inconceivable damage. _Maitland._

The French having unmercifully destroyed the Palatinate, by burning the
cities and towns, near 12,000 Palatines arrived at London, where they
met with the most charitable assistance. Above 3000 of them were sent to
Ireland, and the rest to our plantations, where they have made very
great improvements.

In the latter end of this reign, great disturbances were occasioned by
two sermons preached by Dr. Sacheverel; in which he represented the
church to be in danger from the dissenters; for these inflaming
discourses he was impeached by the Commons, and tried by the Lords, at
which the mob were so exasperated, that they pulled down several meeting
houses, and occasioned great disturbances.

Soon after the death of Queen Anne, King George I. made his public entry
into London, the Lord Mayor carrying the city sword before him, from St.
Margaret’s hill to St. James’s palace.

In 1715 happened a total eclipse; and the same year a severe frost began
in November, and continued with short intermissions till the middle of
February; by which the Thames was frozen over, and a great number of
booths erected upon it.

The next year great disturbances were caused by the enemies of the
government, who, on the King’s birth day, accession to the crown, and
coronation, assembled in the streets in a tumultuous manner, and with
the most amazing assurance, by expressions and representations, in the
grossest manner dishonoured his Majesty. This induced the friends of the
government, under some persons of the highest distinction, to form
themselves into societies, at certain alehouses, which, from the vessels
out of which they drank, were denominated _mughouses_, at each of which
were deposited a great number of cudgels. At this the rabble were so
exasperated, that many thousands of them assembled, and attacking one of
those houses in Salisbury court, Fleet street, the landlord, in
defending his property, killed one of the assailants; but this did not
prevent their rifling the house, before they could be dispersed.
However, several rioters being taken, they were soon after tried, when
five of them were condemned and executed at the end of Salisbury court;
which put an effectual stop to all tumultuous practices for many years.

It is observable, that in 1716, by a long dry season, the river Thames
was reduced so low, that by a violent storm of wind at west south west,
it was blown so dry, during the recess of the tide, that many thousands
of people passed it on foot, both above and below bridge, and walked
thro’ most of the arches.

The year 1720 will be ever famous in this city, for the destructive
South Sea scheme, by which many thousands of the wealthy citizens and
others were impoverished, while others acquired immense riches. See
SOUTH SEA COMPANY.

The year 1733 was rendered memorable by the effectual opposition made by
the citizens against a scheme for a general excise.

In 1734, two spacious arches, ten feet high and six wide, were erected
as a common sewer over the Fleet ditch, from Holborn to the end of Fleet
street; and a neat market house being since erected in the same place,
by the name of Fleet market, was opened in the year 1737; and the next
year the buildings and sheds of Stocks market, at the end of the
Poultry, were cleared away, in order to lay the foundation of a mansion
house for the Lord Mayor, which was afterwards erected. See MANSION
HOUSE.

The present reign is indeed rendered remarkable by the multitude of
magnificent buildings, fine streets, and spacious squares, that have
been added, and still are adding to this metropolis. A taste for
elegance in architecture, and a desire to improve and adorn the city,
have produced one of the finest bridges in the world at Westminster;
have caused London bridge to be stripped of its ruinous buildings that
encumbered the passage, and will soon render it as commodious and
beautiful as possible. Another elegant bridge is erecting at Black
Friars, in so grand a taste as to do honour to the city. We are become
sensible of the absurdity of building magnificent structures in holes
and narrow passages, where they cannot be seen to advantage; and now
resolve to make what is beautiful in itself, an ornament to the city.

But this is not all; charity and humanity now triumph over bigotry and
superstition, and the rage of party is on all sides ready to expire;
churchmen and dissenters mingle in the same company without animosity,
and friendships are contracted between those of different sentiments,
both with respect to religion and government; while party zeal is almost
confined to the ignorant and the vulgar.

During this reign the wealthy have shewn their humanity and pity for the
distresses of their fellow creatures, by erecting a great number of
infirmaries and hospitals, for the relief of those afflicted with any of
the diseases to which human nature is subject; while others are
appropriated to the cure of particular distempers. The deserted infant
is received into an hospital founded for its education and support; the
young, innocent, friendless girl finds an asylum; even the repenting
prostitute has an opportunity of returning to virtue. The poor married
woman is relieved and supported in the time of her greatest difficulty,
distress and danger; she who is under the same distress, with the
additional pangs of guilt, has a receptacle in which she also may be
delivered, and supported during her lying-in, without the least expence.
Those under the small-pox, who were formerly sent to pest-houses, and
treated as if they had the plague, are now happily accommodated in
places prepared for their relief; and there is even an hospital for
inoculating the young who never had this formidable disease, in order to
prevent the fatal effects which commonly attend its being caught in a
riper age. In short, the last charitable foundation I shall mention, as
an honour to the present age and nation, is the Marine Society; a
society formed for increasing our mariners, by clearing our streets of
poor vagabond boys, and men destitute of the means of procuring an
honest support; thus those are made to contribute to the glory and
safety of the nation, who would otherwise be brought up to plunder and
rapine, who would live in misery and vice, and probably end their days
with ignominy. See an account of each of these societies under their
several articles, ASYLUM, LYING-IN HOSPITAL, MARINE SOCIETY, &c.

The arms of the City of London are, _Argent_, a cross _Gules_, with a
sword the same. Some say this was the sword of St. Paul; and others,
that it is the sword of William Walworth Lord Mayor of London, who
killed the rebel Wat Tyler, anno 1381, in the presence and defence of
Richard II.


LONDON ASSURANCE, in Birchin lane, Cornhill, for assuring houses and
other buildings, houshold furniture, goods, wares, and merchandize, from
loss or damage by fire: except glass and china ware, not in trade, and
all manner of writings, books of accompts, notes, bills, bonds, tallies,
ready money, jewels, plate, pictures, gunpowder, hay, straw, and corn
unthreshed; and for assurance of lives.

This society was incorporated by letters patent granted by King George
I. for assuring ships and merchandize at sea; and for lending money upon
bottomry; in consideration of which grant the Corporation were to
advance his Majesty 300,000l. without interest, for the term of thirty
years: towards the raising of which, and paying the just demands that
might be made upon their respective policies, the Company were impowered
to raise a sum, not exceeding 1,500,000l. to be called the stock of the
Corporation: by a second charter, granted to this Corporation in the
year 1721, they were impowered not only to insure ships, but houses,
goods, and even lives.

This society is under the direction of a Governor, Sub-governor, and
Deputy Governor, and twenty-four directors.

They assure houses and goods upon the following terms and conditions.

I. All manner of brick and stone buildings covered with slate, tile, or
lead, wherein no hazardous trades are carried on, nor any hazardous
goods deposited, are termed _Common assurances_, and are assured for the
following premiums, viz. any sum not exceeding 200l. at 4s. _per annum_;
any sum above 200l. and not exceeding 1000l. at 2s. _per cent. per
annum_; and any sum above 1000l. and not exceeding 3000l. at 2s. 6d.
_per cent. per annum_; and goods and merchandize not hazardous, in brick
or stone buildings, after the same rates.

II. For the accommodation of such persons as are desirous of being
assured for a term of years, this Corporation will assure (on such
buildings or goods as aforesaid) any sum not exceeding 1000l. at the
rate of 12s. _per cent._ for seven years, and as far as 2000l. at the
rate of 14s. _per cent._ for the like term of seven years, without
subjecting the assured to any calls or contributions to make good
losses.

III. Assurances on buildings and goods, are deemed distinct and separate
adventures; so that the premium on goods is not advanced by reason of
any assurance on the building wherein the goods are kept, nor the
premium on the building by reason of any assurance on the goods.

IV. Timber or plaister buildings covered with slate, tile, or lead,
wherein no hazardous trades are carried on, nor any hazardous goods
deposited: and goods or merchandize not hazardous, in such buildings,
are termed _Hazardous assurances_, and assured as follows; any sum not
exceeding 200l. at 6s. _per annum_: any sum above 200l. and not
exceeding 1000l. at 3s. _per cent. per annum_: any sum above 1000l. and
not exceeding 2000l. at 4s. _per cent. per annum_: and any sum above
2000l. and not exceeding 3000l. at 5s. _per cent. per annum_.

V. Hazardous trades, such as apothecaries, bread and bisket bakers,
colourmen, ship and tallow-chandlers, innholders and stable-keepers,
carried on in brick or stone buildings, covered with slate, tile, or
lead; and hazardous goods, such as hemp, flax, pitch, tar, tallow, and
turpentine, deposited in such buildings, may be assured at the annual
premiums, set down under the head of hazardous assurances, in the above
article.

VI. Any of the above hazardous trades carried on, or hazardous goods
deposited in timber or plaister buildings; earthen, glass, and china
ware, in trade; and thatched buildings, or goods therein, are termed
_Double hazardous assurances_, and may be assured upon the following
conditions: any sum not exceeding 200l. at 10s. _per annum_: any sum
above 200l. and not exceeding 1000l. at 5s. _per cent. per annum_: and
any sum above 1000l. and not exceeding 2000l. at 7s. 6d. _per cent. per
annum_.

VII. Deal yards, also chymists, distillers, sugar-bakers, maltsters, or
any other assurances more than ordinarily hazardous, by reason of the
trade, nature of the goods, narrowness of the place, or other dangerous
circumstances, may be made by special agreement.

VIII. Two dwelling-houses, or any one dwelling-house, and the out-houses
thereunto belonging, or any one dwelling-house and goods therein, may be
included in the sum of 200l. But when several buildings, or buildings
and goods, are assured in the same policy, the sum assured on each is to
be particularly mentioned.

IX. To prevent frauds, if any buildings or goods assured with this
Corporation, are, or shall be assured with any other corporation or
society, the policy granted by this Corporation is to be null and void,
unless such other assurance is allowed by endorsement on the policy.

X. No policy is to be of any force, till the premium for one year is
paid. And for all subsequent annual premiums, the assured are to take
receipts, stamped with the seal of the Corporation, no other being
allowed of.

XI. No policy is to be extended, or construed to extend to the assurance
of any hazardous buildings or goods, unless they are expressly mentioned
in the policy, and the proper premium for such assurances be paid for
the same.

XII. No loss or damage by fire happening by any invasion, foreign enemy,
or any military or usurped power whatsoever, is to be made good.

XIII. All persons assured by this Corporation, are upon any loss or
damage by fire, forthwith to give notice thereof, by letter, or
otherwise, to the Directors or Secretary, at their house in London: and
within fifteen days after such fire, deliver in as particular an account
of their loss or damage, as the nature of the case will admit of, and
make proof of the same, by the oath or affirmation of themselves, their
domestics or servants, or by their books of accounts, or other proper
vouchers, as shall be required; and also to procure a certificate under
the hands of the Minister and Church-wardens, together with some other
reputable inhabitants of the parish, not concerned in such loss;
importing, that they are well acquainted with the character and
circumstances of the sufferer or sufferers; and do know, or verily
believe, that he, she, or they, have really, and by misfortune,
sustained by such fire the loss and damage therein mentioned. And in
case any difference shall arise between the Corporation and the assured,
touching any loss or damage, such difference shall be submitted to the
judgment and determination of arbitrators indifferently chosen, whose
award in writing shall be conclusive and binding to all parties. And
when any loss or damage is settled and adjusted, the sufferer or
sufferers are to receive immediate satisfaction for the same.

XIV. In adjusting losses on houses, no wainscot, sculpture or
carved-work, is to be valued at more than 3s. _per_ yard.

_N. B._ There is no average clause in the policies of this Corporation;
but the assured, in case of loss, receive the full damage sustained,
deducing only three _per cent._ according to the terms of the policy.

Persons assured by this Corporation do not depend upon an uncertain fund
or contribution, nor are they subject to any covenants or calls to make
good losses which may happen to themselves or others. The capital stock
of this Corporation being an unquestionable security to the assured in
case of loss or damage by fire, and in case of such loss or damage the
assured have as easy methods of recovery as can be had against any
person or society whatsoever.

For the timely assistance of such as are assured by this Corporation,
they have provided several engines and watermen, with proper instruments
to extinguish fires, and porters for removing goods, all cloathed in
green; and having every one a badge, with the figure of Britannia,
holding a harp, and supported by the London arms, to distinguish them
from servants belonging to other offices, and the badges are all
numbered; of which all persons are desired to take notice, who intrust
them with goods, or have any complaint to make.

The same figure as on the badges is affixed on buildings, &c. assured by
this Corporation. _The proposals printed for the Corporation, in 1758._


LONDON BRIDGE, appears to have been originally built between the years
993, and 1016, since in the first-mentioned year, Anlaf, the Dane,
sailed up the Thames, with a fleet of ninety-three ships, as far as
Stanes; and in the last, Canute, King of Denmark, caused a canal to be
formed on the south side of the Thames, for conveying his ships above
the bridge.

If the traditionary account of the origin of the ancient wooden bridge,
delivered by Bartholomew Linstead, alias Fowle, the last Prior of St.
Mary Overy’s convent, is worthy of credit, we are indebted to the public
spirit of that religious house for this structure: “A ferrie being kept,
says he, in a place where now the bridge is builded; at length the
ferrieman and his wife deceasing, left the same ferrie to their only
daughter, a maiden, named Marie, which, with the goods left by her
parents, as also from the profits arising from the ferrie, builded a
house of sisters in a place where now standeth the east part of St. Mary
Overie’s church, unto which house she gave the oversight and profits of
the ferrie: but afterwards the said house of sisters being converted
into a college of priests, they builded the bridge of timber, as all
other the great bridges of this land were, and from time to time kept
the same in good reparations; till at length, considering the great
charges of repairing the same, there was, by aid of the citizens of
London and others, a bridge builded with arches of stone.”

However, the continuators of Stow imagine, that Linstead, in this
account, exceeds the truth, in ascribing all the praise of so public a
work to a small house of religious, who might probably only consent to
its being built, upon the monks receiving a sufficient recompence for
the loss of the ferry, by which they had always been supported; the
probability of this appears from there being lands appropriated for the
repairs of the bridge so early as in the reign of Henry I. Besides, it
can scarcely be supposed, that a petty convent could be able to erect
and support such an edifice, which, besides other accidents, was burnt
down in 1136, and was again so ruinous in 1163, that it was obliged to
be new built, under the inspection of Peter, Curate of St. Mary
Colechurch, in London; a person who had obtained great reputation for
his skill in architecture.

At length, the continual and large expence in maintaining a wooden
bridge becoming burthensome to the people, who, when the lands
appropriated to that use fell short of their produce, were taxed to make
up the deficiencies, it was resolved in 1176, to build one of stone, a
little to the west of the other, which in the time of William the
Conqueror began at Botolph’s wharf; and this structure was completed in
1209.

The foundation is, by the vulgar, generally believed to be laid upon
woolpacks, which opinion probably arose from a tax being laid upon every
pack of wool, towards its construction. Mr. Stow is of opinion, that
before the bridge was erected, they were obliged to turn the Thames into
a large canal made for that purpose, which began at Battersea, and
returned into the bed of the river at Rotherhithe; but this supposition
has not the least foundation. Mr. Maitland justly observes, that the
purchase of the ground through which this spacious water course was to
run; the expence of digging and raising the banks of sufficient
strength; and the prodigious expence of damming off the river above and
below the intended bridge, would have amounted to treble the sum of
erecting the bridge itself; and that the space of thirty-three years,
which the bridge took up in building, is sufficient to destroy so wild a
notion; since if the people concerned in erecting it had dry ground to
build upon, it might have been finished in a tenth part of the time, and
in a much more durable manner.

The same gentleman observes, that having carefully surveyed the bridge
in the year 1730, in company with Mr. Sparruck, the water carpenter
thereof, he observed in many places where the stones were washed from
the sterlings, the vast frames of piles, whereon the stone piers were
founded. The exterior part of these piles were extremely large, and
driven as close as art could effect, and on the top were laid long beams
of timber of the thickness of ten inches, strongly bolted; whereon was
placed the base of the stone piers, nine feet above the bed of the
river, and three below the sterlings; and that on the outside of this
foundation were driven the piles called the sterlings.

Mr. Sparruck informed him, that he and the bridge-mason had frequently
taken out of the lowermost layers of stones in the piers, several of the
original stones, which had been laid in pitch instead of mortar; and
that this occasioned their being of opinion, that all the outside stones
of the piers, as high as the sterlings, were originally laid in the same
matter, to prevent the waters damaging the work. This Mr. Maitland
naturally supposes, was done at every tide of ebb, till the work was
raised above the high water mark.

It is remarkable, that the master mason of this great work erected at
his own expence a chapel on the east side of the ninth pier from the
north end, and endowed it for two priests, four clerks, &c. This chapel,
which was dedicated to St. Thomas, was a beautiful arched Gothic
structure, sixty-five feet long, twenty feet and a half broad, and
fourteen in height. Great part of this edifice lately remained very
perfect; it was paved with black and white marble, and in the middle was
a sepulchral monument in which was probably interred Peter, curate of
Colechurch, the architect, or master mason, who began the work, but died
before it was completed. Clusters of small pillars arise at equal
distances on the sides, and bending over the roof, meet in the center of
the arch, where they are bound together by large flowers cut in the same
stone: between these pillars were the windows, which afforded a view of
the Thames on each side, and were arched, and far from being unhandsome:
but these have long been closed up with brick-work. It had an entrance
from the river as well as the street, from which last there was a
descent to it by a winding pair of stone steps twisting round a pillar.
These stairs opened into a short passage, on the right hand of which was
a cavity in the wall for holding the bason of holy water. On the 30th of
September 1758, when we had the pleasure of seeing it, this edifice
existed in the above form, only a part of the arch was obliged to make
way for a shop floor, and some of the body was divided into an upper and
lower story for the convenience of warehouse room, it then belonging to
an eminent stationer.

But notwithstanding all this art and expence in building the bridge with
stone, it was soon in great want of repairs: for about four years after
it was finished, a fire broke out in Southwark, which taking hold of the
church of our Lady of the Canons, or St. Mary Overy’s, a south wind
communicated the flames to the houses on the north side of the bridge,
which interrupted the passage, and stopped the return of a multitude of
people who had run from London to help to extinguish the fire in
Southwark: and while the amazed croud were endeavouring to force a
passage back to the city through the flames on the north end of the
bridge, the fire broke out at the south end also; so that being inclosed
between two great fires, above three thousand people perished in the
flames, or were drowned by overloading the vessels that ventured to come
to their assistance.

By this dreadful accident, and other circumstances, this new stone
bridge was in so ruinous a condition, that King Edward I. granted the
bridgekeeper a brief to ask and receive the charity of his subjects
throughout the kingdom, towards repairing it: besides which, he caused
letters to be wrote to the clergy of all degrees, earnestly pressing
them to contribute to so laudable a work; but these methods proving
ineffectual, he granted a toll, by which every foot passenger carrying
merchandize over the bridge, was to pay one farthing; every horseman
with merchandize, 1d. and every saleable pack carried and palling over,
a halfpenny.

But while these affairs were in agitation, the ruin of the bridge was
completed, by five arches being borne down and destroyed by the ice and
floods, after a great frost and deep snow in the year 1282.

However, the drawbridge, which had at first a tower on the north side,
and was contrived to afford a passage for ships with provisions to
Queenhithe, as well as to prevent the attempts of an enemy, was begun to
be built in the year 1426; but about ten years after two of the arches
at the south end, together with the bridgegate, fell down; and the ruins
of the latter still remaining, one of the locks or passages for the
water, was almost rendered useless; whence it received the name of the
rock lock, which has occasioned the citizens to take it for a natural
rock; and indeed though these ruins have lain in the water for above
three centuries, they are still as impenetrable as a solid rock.

From that time the buildings on the bridge increased slowly; for in
1471, when Thomas Fauconbridge the Bastard, besieged the bridge, there
were no more than thirteen houses besides the gate, and a few other
buildings erected upon it.

However, in Stow’s time, both sides were built up, and it had the
appearance of a regular street, there being only left three openings,
with stone walls and iron rails over them, to afford a prospect east and
west of the Thames. These were over three of the widest arches, usually
called the navigable locks.

Thus we see that the bridge in Stow’s time nearly resembled what it was
before the houses were lately pulled down: and the continuator of Mr.
Stow observes, that it continued in the same state till the year 1632;
when on the 13th of February, the buildings on the north end of the
bridge to the vacancy on both sides, containing forty-two houses, were
burnt down by a maid servant’s carelessness, in setting a tub of hot
sea-coal ashes under a pair of stairs, at a needle-maker’s near St.
Magnus’s church: this fire burnt very furiously, and there being a
scarcity of water, occasioned by the Thames being almost frozen over,
these buildings were all consumed within eight hours.

In this condition the bridge continued for several years; the confusions
in the state interrupting the government of the city, and putting a stop
to all farther improvements. However, some of the houses next the city
were rebuilt of timber in the years 1645 and 1646; these edifices were
three stories high; they had flat roofs adorned with balustrades, and
had cellars contrived within and between the piers.

The bridge had not indeed intirely recovered from its ruinous condition
in 1666, when it again suffered in the general conflagration of the
city, most of the buildings being totally consumed, except a few at the
south end, erected in the reign of King John; and the very stone work of
the bridge was so injured and weakened by this melancholy event, that it
cost the bridge-house 1500l. to make good the damage of the piers and
arches.

The stone work was, however, no sooner secured, than a sufficient number
of tenants offered, who agreed with the bridge-house for building leases
of sixty-one years, paying to the city the annual rent of ten shillings
per foot running, and to build in such a form and manner as was
prescribed. This was carried into execution with such dispatch, that
within five years the north end was completely finished, with houses
four stories high, and a street twenty feet broad between side and side:
after which all the old buildings at the south end were rebuilt in the
same manner.

In the year 1722, the Lord Mayor, Aldermen, and Common Council, being
sensible of the great inconveniences and mischiefs which happened by the
disorderly driving of coaches, carts, and other carriages, over the
bridge, published an order, that all carriages coming out of Southwark
into the city, should keep all along on the west side of the bridge, and
those going out of the city on the east side; appointing three persons
at each end to see this order executed: and this method is still
observed.

Three years after this order, the gate at the south end being greatly
damaged by a fire which broke out at a brush-maker’s, and destroyed
several of the adjacent houses, it was built with stone, with two
posterns for the convenience of foot passengers. This gate was finished
at the expence of the city in the year 1728.

At length the building leases being expired, the city was sensible of
the inconvenience of not having a footway, which had occasioned the loss
of many lives, from the number of carriages continually passing and
repassing, projected a plan for rebuilding the street over the bridge
with colonades on each side, by which foot passengers might be both
secured from the horses and carriages, and sheltered from the weather.
Part of this plan was a few years ago carried into execution, from the
first opening on the north-east end, and its advantages were so obvious,
that every body was desirous of seeing it completed.

However, in 1746 the Lord Mayor, Aldermen, and Common Council,
considering the many lives that were lost thro’ the streightness of the
arches, and the enormous size of the sterlings, which took up one fourth
of the water way, and occasioned the fall at low water to be no less
than five feet; as well as the great expence of repairing the bridge,
which for several years had annually amounted to 2000l. came to the
resolution of taking down all the houses, and to widen and enlarge one
or more of the arches. Accordingly the Court ordered their surveyor to
draw a plan, and make an estimate of the expence; which having done, the
total amounted to 95,000l. when it was immediately agreed not to grant
or renew any lease or leases of the houses, but to let those unexpired
run out, and consequently the houses run to ruin. _Stow._ _Maitland._

Indeed this scheme was in part proposed immediately after the fire of
London, by both Sir Christopher Wren and Sir John Evelyn; these
ingenious gentlemen proposing, instead of houses, to have a substantial
balustrade on each side; and after them, the author of the _Review of
the public buildings_ had the following remarks, “As some people are
ignorant enough to admire the bridge merely because it is encumbered
with houses from end to end; it will not be amiss to observe, that
nothing can be more ridiculous than this invention; nothing can possibly
offend the eye more, or extinguish so many beauties as might take place,
in case this popular nuisance was removed: suppose the present structure
of the bridge was still to continue as it is, there would, at least, be
room for a magnificent breast-work and balustrade above, and the top
would afford one of the finest prospects in the world: on one hand a
fleet of merchant ships, equal in value and importance to half a nation;
on the other, two of the most considerable cities in Europe, stretching
along the banks of a beautiful river, and ending with a distant view of
the adjacent landscape.”

At length the leaning houses on each side seemed ready to fall into the
river, and the passenger could scarcely forbear shuddering, when he
observed that any of them was inhabited. At the same time, the structure
of the noble bridge at Westminster, with the magnitude, safety, and
convenience of the arches, convinced the citizens more and more of the
advantages that would arise from the resolution of pulling down the
houses; and in the year 1756, every one was pleased, that the Lord
Mayor, Aldermen and Common Council, had applied to parliament to enable
them to put this resolution in practice. In short, an act was obtained,
and they were enabled to provide for the expence, by collecting a toll
for every horse and carriage that passed over it, except those used for
tillage, till the principal and interest of the money that should be
borrowed and laid out upon it, should be repaid.

These measures being taken, orders were soon given for taking down the
houses on both sides of the way, for a considerable distance north of
the gate. This not only pleased every inhabitant of the city of London
and the borough of Southwark, but every one who had occasion to pass and
repass over this useful bridge; and all whose business leads them to
pass in any kind of craft thro’ the arches, began to please themselves
with the thought, that their lives would hereafter be secure in the
exercise of their lawful employments.

The houses and arches that extended across the bridge being taken down,
in all the middle part of that structure a strong temporary bridge, made
of wood, was with amazing expedition erected upon the western sterlings
of the old structure, for the passage of carriages, horsemen, and foot
passengers, till the intended alterations should be completed; and this
edifice, which was rendered as safe and convenient as possible, was
opened in October 1757.

But when the pavement was dug up, and an opening made into the cavities
of all the piers; when some of them were demolished almost to the
water’s edge, and the whole space where the houses had been taken down
was a confused heap of ruins, that had not the least resemblance of a
bridge, the temporary structure burst into a flame, and was intirely
consumed.

The fire began on Tuesday the 11th of April 1758, at about eleven at
night; and by nine o’clock the next morning, the whole temporary bridge
was consumed; though the drawbridge and some pieces of timber among the
ruins of the old structure continued burning all the next day.

Various have been the reports of the manner in which this useful
structure was set on fire. Some have said, that about ten in the evening
they saw several persons who appeared in liquor, coming over the bridge
with a torch, and endeavouring to get it from him who held it, while he
strove, in play, to defend himself by burning them, at last threw it
over the boarded fence of the bridge, when the light disappeared, till
the timber below burst into a flame. On the other hand, the watchmen on
the Customhouse key on the east side, and at the Steelyard on the west,
with many others, are said to have observed about eleven, some lights
under the bridge, which appeared in several places like candles in
lanthorns; and that soon after, the bridge, from one end to the other,
burst into flames: but those who first saw the progress of the fire,
observe, that it began in one spot, and extended itself both ways
progressively.

At this disaster the citizens were filled with consternation, imagining
that the communication between the city and borough of Southwark would
for a long time be in a great measure cut off; and every body naturally
concluded, that this dreadful disaster was occasioned by some vile
incendiaries. The Lord Mayor, who had attended almost the whole time of
the conflagration, and did his utmost to stop it, waited in the morning
on Mr. Pitt with the dreadful account; and having immediately obtained
his Majesty’s pardon for any person who would discover the authors of
the calamity, except the identical perpetrators of it, called a court of
Common Council, who came to the resolution to offer a reward of 200l.
for discovering the base and villainous incendiaries. But though a
considerable time is elapsed, no discovery has yet been made.

This prudent step being first taken, the builders of the bridge were
asked, how soon they could possibly render it passable for carriages;
when they promised to complete it within three weeks, on condition of
being allowed to work on Sundays, and to employ a sufficient number of
men. This news filled the people with equal joy and surprize; but this
surprize was greatly increased, when they found that by keeping men
constantly at work day and night, this great work was completed and the
old bridge opened again in less than a fortnight; and that in this short
time those arches that had been taken down, and the deep cavities in all
the piers lately used for cellars, were covered over; the piers which
had been demolished had stages formed of large beams of timber raised to
support the upper works, and the whole track of ruins was covered with
rows of strong beams placed close together; these were gravelled over to
a considerable depth; and a strong wooden fence, on each side, raised
about six feet high, with places formed for foot passengers to stand in
at proper distances, to secure themselves from being hurt by the
carriages.

This great work was no sooner finished with such amazing expedition,
than preparations were made for a new temporary bridge, which was soon
after begun, and in a short time was opened.

The great loss the city had suffered by the burning of the temporary
bridge, induced the Lord Mayor, Aldermen, and Common Council, to apply
to Parliament for relief; when that body, rendering the repairing and
the beautifying of London bridge a national concern, an act was passed
the same year for granting the city 15,000l. towards the carrying on of
that work; upon which two toll booths that had been erected for
receiving the toll granted by a former act, were immediately taken down,
and all horses and carriages suffered to go toll free.

To prevent posterity being deceived by the pompous elogiums bestowed on
this bridge, which has been stiled _The wonder of the world_, _The
bridge of the world_, and _The bridge of wonders_, the following
faithful description of it, we apprehend, will not be improper. And
indeed this is the more necessary, as no accurate description of this
bridge has ever yet been published. The Thames in this part is 915 feet
broad, and that is the length of the bridge, which was forty-three feet
seven inches in height. The street, which before the houses fell to
decay, consisted of handsome lofty edifices, pretty regularly built; it
was twenty feet broad, and the houses on each side generally 26½ feet
deep. Across the middle of the street ran several lofty arches extending
from side to side, the bottom part of each arch terminating at the first
story, and the upper part reaching near the top of the buildings, the
work over the arches extending in a strait line from side to side. These
arches were designed to prevent the houses giving way. They were
therefore formed of strong timbers bolted into the timbers of the houses
on each side, and being covered with laths and plaister, appeared as if
built with stone; and in some of them a closet, or little room, was
formed in the cavities next the houses, with a window to the north, and
another to the south.

It has been already observed, that this street had three openings on
each side, adorned with iron rails, to afford the passengers a view of
the river, and placed over three of the widest arches, called navigable
locks; because vessels of considerable burthen have been used to pass
thro’ them. That arch next the gate has obtained the name of the rock
lock, from the cause already mentioned: that under the drawbridge was
called the drawbridge lock; and the third, near the chapel (which could
not easily be distinguished from the rest of the houses) was called St.
Mary’s lock: and there was a fourth between St. Magnus’s church at the
foot of the bridge, and the first vacancy northward, called the King’s
lock; from its being customary for the King to go thro’ it in his
passage through the bridge.

Thus the street on the bridge had nothing to distinguish it from a
common handsome narrow street; but the high arches towards the middle,
and the three openings on each side, which afforded an agreeable view of
the river. But on the outside the view from the water, and from the
keys, was as disagreeable as possible. Nineteen unequilateral arches,
with sterlings increased to a monstrous size by frequent repairs,
supported the street above. These arches were of very different sizes,
and several that were low and narrow, were placed between others that
were broad and lofty. The back part of the houses next the Thames had
neither uniformity nor any degree of beauty; the line was broken by a
great number of closets projecting from the buildings, and by mean
necessary houses hanging over the sterlings. This deformity was
increased by the houses extending a considerable distance over the sides
of the bridge, and by some of them projecting farther over it than
others: by which means the tops of almost all the arches, except those
that were nearest, were concealed from the view of the passengers on the
keys, and gave the bridge the appearance of a multitude of rude piers,
with only an arch or two at the end, and the rest consisting of beams
extending from the tops of flat piers, without any other arches, quite
across the river.

But most of these deformities will be soon removed. Instead of a narrow
street of twenty feet wide, there will be a passage of thirty-one feet
broad for carriages; with a handsome raised pavement of stone on each
side, seven feet broad, for the use of foot passengers; and, instead of
houses projecting over the river, the sides will be secured and adorned
by an elegant balustrade. Like Westminster bridge, it will be handsomely
enlightened with lamps from sun-setting to sun-rising, and guarded in
the night by a number of watchmen; the expences of both which are to be
defrayed out of the bridge-house estate.


LONDON BRIDGE WATER WORKS. In the reign of Queen Elizabeth were erected
in the arches at the south end of this bridge, mills for grinding corn,
in order that the city might supply the poor with meal, at a reasonable
rate, in a time of scarcity, or when the price was unjustly raised by
avaricious badgers and mealmen. Afterwards, in the year 1582, Peter
Morice, a Dutchman, contrived a water engine to supply the citizens with
Thames water: this was, about fifty years ago, improved by Mr. Sorocold;
and, since that time, by that great master of hydraulics, Mr. Hadley,
who rendered it far superior to the so much famed water-engine at Marli
in France; which is so ill contrived in its cranks, that it is said to
cost 25,000l. sterling _per annum_ to keep it in repair.

This machine was at first made to force the water no higher than
Gracechurch street. The first engineer obtained from the city a lease
for 500 years, at the annual rent of 10s. for the use of the Thames, and
one arch, with a place for fixing his mill upon. The citizens soon
experienced the benefit of this invention, and granted him a like lease,
two years after, for another arch: by which means he grew very wealthy;
and it continued in his family, under various improvements, till the
year 1701; when the property was sold to one Richard Soams, a citizen
and goldsmith. Morice having first, at the purchaser’s request, obtained
another lease of the fourth arch, for the further improvement of the
said works, after selling the whole property thereof for 36,000l. Mr.
Soams, to prevent all disputes with the citizens, then applied to the
city for a confirmation of his bargain with Mr. Morice, and obtained a
fresh lease from them for the term unexpired of that gentleman’s lease,
at the yearly rent of 20s. and 300l. fine. After which he divided the
whole property into three hundred shares, at 500l. each share, and made
it a Company.

The wheels placed under the arches are moved by the common stream of the
tidewater of the river Thames. The axle-tree of the water wheel is
nineteen feet long, and three feet diameter; in which are four sets of
arms, eight in each place, whereon are fixed four rings on sets of
felloes, twenty feet in diameter, and twenty-six floats, fourteen inches
long, and eighteen inches deep.

The wheel lies, with its two gudgeons or center pins, upon two brasses,
fixed on two great levers, whose _fulcrum_ or top, is an arched piece of
timber, the levers being made circular on their lower sides to an arch,
and kept in their places by two arching studs, fixed with a sock through
two mortises in the lever.

By these levers the wheel is thus made to rise and fall with the tide:
the levers are sixteen feet long, that is, from the fulcrum to the
gudgeon of the water wheel six feet, and thence to the arch ten feet. To
the bottom of this arch is fixed a strong triple chain, made like a
watch chain, but the links are arched to a circle of one foot diameter,
having notches or teeth to take hold of the leaves of a pinion of cast
iron, ten inches diameter, with eight teeth in it, moving on an axis.
The other loose end of this chain has a large weight hanging at it, to
help to counterpoise the wheel, and to preserve the chain from sliding
on the pinion. On the same axis is fixed a cog-wheel, six feet in
diameter, with forty-eight cogs; to this is applied a trundle or pinion
of six rounds or teeth; and upon the same axis is fixed another
cog-wheel of fifty-one cogs, into which a trundle of six rounds works,
on whose axis is a winch or windlass, by which one man with the two
windlasses raises or lets down the wheel, as there is occasion.

By means of this machine, the strength of an ordinary man will raise
about fifty tons weight. But, besides these levers and wheels, there is
a cog-wheel eight feet diameter, fixed near the end of the great axis,
and working into a trundle of four feet and a half diameter, and twenty
rounds; whose axis or spindle is of cast iron, four inches diameter, and
lying in brass at each end: a quadruple crank of cast iron, six inches
square, each of the necks being turned one foot from the center, which
is fixed in brass at each end, in two head-stocks fastened down by caps.
The end of one of these cranks is placed close abutting to the end of
the axle-tree last mentioned, and fixed thereunto by an iron wedge drove
through a slit in them both for that purpose. The four necks of the
crank have each an iron spear or rod fixed at their upper ends to the
respective lever, within three feet of the end; which levers are
twenty-four feet long, moving on centers in a frame, at the end of which
are jointed four rods, with their forcing-plugs, working into four iron
cylinders, cast four feet three quarters long, seven inches bore above,
and nine below, where the valves lie, fastened by screwed flanches over
the four holes of a hollow trunk of cast iron, having four valves in it,
just at the joining-on at the bottom of the barrels or cylinders, and at
one end a sucking pipe or grate, going into the water, which supplies
all the four cylinders alternately.

From the lower part of these cylinders come out necks, turning upwards
archwise, whose upper parts are cast with flanches to screw up to a
trunk; which necks have bores of seven inches diameter, and holes in the
trunk above, communicating with each of them; at which joining are
placed four valves. This trunk is cast with four bosses, or
protuberances, standing out against the valves, to give room for their
opening and shutting; and on the upper side are four holes stopped with
plugs, which take out, on occasion, to cleanse the valves. One end of
the trunk is stopped by a plug; and iron pipes are joined by flanches to
the other end, thro’ which the water is forced up to any height or place
required.

Besides these four forcers, there are four more placed at the other ends
of the levers, which work in the same manner, with rods and cylinders,
as above. And the same works are repeated at the other end of the
water-wheel, viz. a cog-wheel, a trundle, a spindle, a crank,
sucking-pipes, four levers, eight forcing-rods, eight cylinders, &c.
four trunks, and two forcing-pipes: so that one single wheel works
sixteen pumps.

In the first arch next the city, is one wheel with double work of
sixteen forcers. In the third arch, where the first wheel has double
work at the one end, and single at the other, there are twelve forcers:
the second wheel, placed in the middle, has eight forcers; and the third
wheel sixteen forcers. In all fifty-two forcers.

One turn of the four wheels makes 114 strokes; and when the river is at
best, the wheels go six times round in a minute, and but four and a half
at middle water; so that the number of strokes in a minute are 684; and
as the stroke is two feet and a half in a seven inch bore, which raises
three ale gallons, they raise 2052 gallons in a minute; that is, 123,120
gallons, or 1954 hogsheads in an hour, which is at the rate of 46,896
hogsheads _per_ day, to the height of 120 feet, including the waste,
which may be settled at a fifth part of the whole. _Desaguliers
Mathematics._


LONDON BRIDGE _yard_, Tooley street.


LONDON _court_, 1. London street. 2. Rosemary lane.


LONDON HOUSE, on the west side of Aldersgate street, was anciently
called Dorchester House, and afterwards Petre’s House, from its having
been possessed by the Marquis of Dorchester, and afterwards by the Lord
Petre: but after the restoration being purchased for the residence of
the Bishop of London, it obtained the name of London House. It is a
large commodious brick building, with a neat chapel belonging to it; but
being deserted by the Prelates of this see, is now let out into several
tenements and warehouses.


LONDON HOUSE _yard_, 1. Aldersgate street. 2. St. Paul’s church yard.


LONDON INFIRMARY, on the south side of Whitechapel, is one of the many
foundations that distinguish our country and the present age. It is
supported by charitable and voluntary contributions, for the relief of
all sick and diseased persons; and, in particular, manufacturers, seamen
in the merchants service, and their wives and children.

This charity was instituted on the 2d of November 1740, in a large house
in Prescot street, Goodman’s Fields, which is now the Magdalen hospital;
but that becoming too small for this extensive charity, a new, more
capacious, and more commodious building was erected by the voluntary
contributions of several Governors, in an airy situation, near the Mount
in Whitechapel road.

This is a very neat brick building, contrived to be plain and yet
elegant, without being very expensive; and it consisting of one extended
front, without either wings or inner courts, the whole is seen at one
view. To the middle door is an ascent by a flight of steps, and over
this part extends a very large angular pediment, within which is a dial.
Above the ground floor extend two series, of each twenty-three sash
windows, their number and the length of the building giving it an air of
dignity. The architect has properly considered the use for which it is
designed, and has suited every thing to convenience. It is properly
furnished, and fitted up with about 160 beds for the reception of the
patients.

The society for carrying on this laudable undertaking, consists of a
President, two Vice Presidents, and a Treasurer, annually elected out of
the most considerable benefactors to this charity, and of such persons,
who by giving a benefaction of thirty guineas or more at one time,
become Governors for life; and those who subscribe five guineas or more
a year, are Governors during such subscription.

A general court of Governors is held in the months of March, June,
September, and December, to take the report of the committees, elect a
house committee for the ensuing quarter, inspect accounts, and transact
such other business as may be then laid before them. The anniversary
feast of this charity is held between the first of February and the last
day of April, when a printed account of the general state of the
hospital, the number of patients received and discharged, and an
abstract of the accounts for the year past, is laid before them.

A house committee of thirteen Governors is appointed at every general
quarterly court, who at their first meeting elect a Chairman to preside
for the first quarter; who meet at the hospital, on Tuesdays weekly, at
eleven in the forenoon, to receive and dismiss patients, to order and
inspect the provisions and furniture sent in, and such necessaries that
may be wanting, and to examine and regulate the conduct of the servants
and patients; and other matters which come before them, according to the
constitution of this charity. All Governors that please to attend, have
a vote at this committee, and their attendance is esteemed a favour.

A committee of accounts, consisting of twelve Governors, is appointed at
the general quarterly court in June, for one year, who meet at the
hospital once a quarter, to examine and audit tradesmens bills, which
are paid by the Treasurer within a fortnight after. The accounts are
open at all times for the inspection of the Governors,

A physical committee, consisting of all such Governors who practise
physic, surgery, or pharmacy, or are conversant in the knowledge of
drugs or medicines (excepting such as shall be directly or indirectly
concerned in serving the hospital with such necessaries) are summoned by
order of the Chairman of the house committee for the time being every
first Thursday in the month, and have power to order and inspect the
necessary drugs and medicines, and report their proceedings to the
general quarterly court by their Chairman.

Two Governors are appointed visitors by the house committee, for one
fortnight, to attend twice a week, or oftener, if they think proper, to
inspect into the management and conduct of the house, during the
interval of the meetings of the house committee.

A Clergyman of the church of England reads prayers every day, and
preaches every Sunday, and reads prayers morning and afternoon;
administers the sacrament regularly every month; and is ready to visit,
pray by, and administer the sacrament at all times when required, to the
patients in the wards.

Three Physicians attend alternately; two of the Surgeons daily, from
eleven o’clock till one, without fee or reward, and give their advice
and assistance to all such objects as come within those hours, whether
recommended or accidental. A Surgeon extraordinary attends in
consultation, in all dangerous cases. The Surgeons in waiting have an
apprentice, or pupil, constantly in the house, to receive, and, if
necessary, to call the Surgeon to such accidents as shall be brought in
at any hour of the day or night.

An apothecary (with an assistant) constantly resides at the hospital,
who compounds and dispenses all medicines used there, and solely attends
the business thereof.

A steward, (for whose fidelity proper security is given) has the charge
of the house and furniture, keeps an account of every thing brought to
or expended in the house, and subjects the same to the examination of
the visitors, and house committee, and has the inspection likewise of
the conduct of all the men-servants. Two matrons have the direction of
the nurses and other women-servants, and see the diet and medicines
administered according to order. Under them, are nurses, and watchers,
in proportion to the number of patients, who are guided by written
orders to prevent any misconduct. Proper diet for the patients has been
settled by the Physicians and Surgeons engaged in this charity, and is
fixed up in the wards for the satisfaction of the patients and their
friends.

No officers or servants are permitted upon pain of expulsion to take of
any tradesmen, patients, or other persons, any fee, reward, or gratuity
of any kind, directly or indirectly, for any service done, or to be
done, on account of this hospital.

Every Governor is intitled to send one in-patient at a time, and
out-patients without limitation. Subscribers of smaller sums may
likewise send what number of out-patients they please. All subscriptions
are during pleasure, and any small sums from well-disposed persons will
be thankfully received; but in order to carry on this undertaking, all
persons are desired to pay their subscription at the time of
subscribing.

The poor objects recommended as in-patients, if there are beds empty,
are received at any hour without difficulty or expence, and are supplied
with advice, medicine, diet, washing, lodging, and every comfortable
assistance during their cure; nor is any security required against
future contingencies, they being, in case of death, buried at the
expence of the charity, if not removed by their friends. All
out-patients have advice and medicines administered from eleven till
one.

All accidents, whether recommended or not, are received at any hour of
the day or night.

This is the plan of this noble charity; and though this work has
subsisted but eighteen years, yet such has been the extraordinary
encouragement given to it, that since the 3d of November 1740, to the
1st of January 1759, the sums generously contributed to its support
amount to 79,153l. a great part of which is laid out in government
securities. But what is still more extraordinary, 137,252 distressed
objects have been relieved at this hospital; and from labouring under
the oppression of some of the most malignant diseases, and unhappy
accidents, have been reinstated in their honest and industrious
capacities of working, and, so far as our observation reaches, their
morals much amended, whereby the public again enjoy the benefit of their
labour, and they, and their poor families, are preserved from perishing,
and prevented from being an incumbrance to the community. And,
notwithstanding the great number of objects relieved by this charity, it
has not lessened the number of patients relieved by other hospitals.

The subscribers are desired to take notice, that if any patients do not
conform to the rules of the house, or are guilty of any misbehaviour,
they will be discharged, and never more relieved by this charity: and
not to send any patient unable to walk, till they are first assured of
room in the house; and when they recommend an in-patient, whose
settlement is in the country, it is further requested, that they will
satisfy the house committee, concerning the removal of such patient,
when cured or judged incurable.

“No persons of known ability to pay for their cure, are allowed to
partake of this charity; nor any with infectious distempers, or deemed
incurable by the Physicians and Surgeons, or any in consumptive or
asthmatic condition, are admitted into the house, being more capable, of
relief as out-patients.”

The patients, being admitted without any expence, are required to be
constant in their attendance on the Physicians, or Surgeons, at the
hospital, before eleven o’clock; and, at nine o’clock, to return thanks
at the chapel, and at the weekly committee next after their cure; and
those only who attend their cure, and return thanks, will receive a
certificate thereof, which will entitle them to future relief. _The
Account published by order of the Governors in 1759._


LONDON LYING IN HOSPITAL, at Shaftesbury house, on the east side of
Aldersgate street; an edifice built with brick and ornamented with
stone, in a most noble and elegant taste. The front to the street is
adorned with Ionic pilasters; the door is arched, and has a balcony
supported by scrolls. This opens into a small area encompassed with
buildings, within which are accommodations for the patients. This house,
which was built by the masterly hand of Inigo Jones, was formerly the
residence of the Earls of Shaftesbury, and deserves a much better
situation. The polite part of the town is now so far removed from hence,
that this edifice is neither known nor admired so much as it deserves.
This structure, having been converted to several mechanic uses, was
going to decay, but has, however, been thoroughly repaired, and happily
applied to this noble charity; and in this house, support and every
necessary accommodation and assistance are furnished for married women
in the last stage of their pregnancy, time of labour, and month of
lying-in.

[Illustration:

  _The Centre of the West Side of Lincoln’s Inn Fields, late the Duke of
    Ancaster’s, by Inigo Jones._
]

[Illustration:

  _Shaftesbury House, now the Lying-in Hospital, by Inigo Jones._
]

This excellent charity was instituted on the 30th of March 1750, by
several generous and humane persons; and has met with suitable
encouragement from many of both sexes, who justly deserve that
character. But so many distressed objects daily present themselves for
the relief of this charity, which has been attended with a more than
ordinary expence, by the reception of the wives of many seamen and
soldiers in the public service, that its income, supported only by
voluntary contributions, is not equal to its wants; and therefore the
Governors find it still necessary to apply for the assistance of the
charitable and humane. The conditions are,

I. Such persons as subscribe thirty guineas are Governors for life, and
may recommend one pregnant woman to be upon the books at a time.

II. Those who subscribe five or three guineas _per annum_, are Governors
so long as they continue their subscriptions, and intitled to recommend
as in the first article.

III. Annual Governors may make up their subscriptions thirty guineas,
within one year from their last payment, and thereupon become Governors
for life.

IV. All ladies are at liberty in all elections of officers, to vote by
proxy signified in writing.

_N. B._ All lesser benefactions are thankfully received. And for the
satisfaction of the public, that the women are well and properly taken
care of, ladies, though not Governesses, are permitted to go into the
wards.


                        _Rules of the Hospital._

A general court of the Governors is held four times a year; namely, in
the months of March, June, September, and December, to receive the
report of the quarterly committees, elect a new committee, and transact
such other business as may then be laid before them.

A house committee is appointed at every general quarterly court,
consisting of thirteen Governors, three of whom are a _quorum_. This
committee meets every Tuesday morning at eleven o’clock in the forenoon,
at the hospital, to receive and discharge women, inspect the diet and
provisions, order any furniture and conveniences that may from time to
time be wanted, and to examine into and regulate the conduct of all the
servants and patients of the house. These committees are to make their
reports to the general quarterly courts.

The number of beds at present in the hospital is thirty-three.

A Physician, a Man-midwife, and a Surgeon in ordinary, attend daily at
the hospital; besides whom the house is supplied with a Physician and
Man-midwife extraordinary, a Surgeon extraordinary, and an apothecary,
who supplies the patients with such medicines as shall be found
necessary in their respective cases. And that the patients may not want
necessary comfort under their afflictions, a Clergyman has undertaken
the kind and charitable office of attending the house as Chaplain,
baptizes the children born there, churches the women, and reads prayers
publickly twice a week. All these gentlemen attend without fee or
reward.

A matron, who is a skilful midwife, constantly resides in the hospital,
and acts as such in all natural and easy labours.

There are a sufficient number of nurses and other servants to take care
of the lying-in women, and do the common business of the house.

Also a beadle, who constantly resides at the hospital, to be ready to go
on all messages, on sudden emergencies, and summon the Governors, &c.

Note, the servants of the house are forbid to take any fee or reward
from the lying-in women, on any pretence whatsoever, on pain of being
discharged.

Married women admitted into this hospital, must previously produce a
certificate of their marriage from a lawful Minister, or in case they
cannot, then an affidavit of their being married, and the time when and
the place where, and also of the settlement of their husbands, and by
what means such settlement was obtained. And no woman is to be taken
into the house, who hath any contagious distemper, or has been
accustomed to receive alms of a parish.

Such gentlemen and ladies as chuse to favour this laudable charity, are
desired to send their subscriptions, with their names and places of
abode, to the Treasurer, Charles Maynard, Esq; in Aldersgate street; to
Messrs. Vere, Glyn, and Halifax, bankers, in Birchin lane; or to the
weekly committee, on Tuesday in the forenoon, at the said hospital,
where proper receipts will be given,

 ACCOUNT _of_ WOMEN _delivered, from the institution of the hospital to
   the 17th Jan. 1758_.

 Women delivered, 19 of whom had twins, and one delivered
   of three children                                                1914

 Children born                                                      1935

   Males                                                961
   Females                                              974
                                                       ————
                                                       1935
                                                       ————


 Monies received from the institution of the hospital to
   the 13th. Jan. 1758                                       7010 13  0¾

 Monies expended from the institution of the
   hospital to 29th Sept. 1757                   5774  3 6

 £1000 Old South Sea annuities, which cost       1064 12 6

 Cash in Treasurer’s hands                        171 17 0¾
                                                    ———————
                                                 7010 13 0¾

 _The account published by order of the Governors._

See an account of the other hospitals of the same kind, under the
articles LYING-IN HOSPITAL in Brownlow street, and LYING-IN HOSPITAL for
unmarried as well as married women in Duke street.


LONDON ’PRENTICE _yard_, in the Minories.*


LONDON STONE, a very great piece of antiquity, that has been carefully
preserved from age to age, and is mentioned by the same name so early as
in the time of Ethelstan, King of the West Saxons.

This stone, which stands close under the south wall of St. Swithin’s
church, was formerly a little nearer the channel facing the same place,
and being fixed very deep in the ground was so strongly fastened by bars
of iron, as to be in no danger from the carriages.

It seems very surprizing that so great a piece of antiquity has been
constantly preserved with such care, and yet so little has been said of
it, that the original cause of its erection, and the use for which it
was intended, are entirely unknown. A very ingenious author observes,
that as London appears to have been a Roman city, it will be no
improbable conjecture, that this stone was the center, from whence they
extended its dimensions, and might serve as the standard at which they
began to compute their miles. Of this opinion was also Mr. Maitland, and
the great Sir Christopher Wren, who grounded his conjecture upon proofs
which are not every day to be obtained, for by rebuilding many of the
churches after the fire of London, he had an opportunity of discovering
and tracing the ancient boundaries of London, with a greater nicety than
is ever to be expected again: on clearing the foundations of St. Mary le
Bow in Cheapside, he found, upon opening the ground, the walls with the
windows and pavement of a Roman temple, entirely buried under the level
of the present street; this temple stood about forty feet backwards; but
having occasion to bring the steeple of the new church to range with the
high street, he again began to dig through the made ground, till having
proceeded eighteen feet deep, to his surprize he discovered a Roman
causeway of rough stone four feet thick, close and well rammed, with
Roman brick and rubbish at the bottom, all firmly cemented; he was
therefore of opinion, that this was the northern boundary of the Roman
colony, and that the breadth from north to south was from this causeway,
now Cheapside, to the Thames; the extent east and west from Tower hill
to Ludgate: the principal or Prætorian Way, he supposed to be Watling
street; whence London Stone appears to have been nearly in the center of
the ancient city before it was destroyed by Boadicea, and when it was
not encompassed with walls. _Curiosities of London and Westminster._
_Parentalia._


LONDON _street_, 1. A spacious, handsome, and well-built street, on the
south side of Fenchurch street. 2. Mill street, Rotherhith. 3. Rose
lane, Ratcliff.


LONDON WALL, the wall which formerly surrounded the city of London, as a
defence against the attacks of an enemy. It was strengthened with lofty
towers, and had originally only four gates, tho’ the making of new roads
has increased the number to seven, which are now standing, viz. Aldgate,
Bishopsgate, Moorgate, Cripplegate, Aldersgate, Newgate, and Ludgate.
See each of these described in their proper places.

This wall, which is by some supposed to have been built by Constantine
the Great, and by others by his mother Helena, was probably not erected
till the time of Valentinian I. about the year 368. Britain had been
reduced to very great misery, by the joint attacks of the Scots, Picts,
Attacots, Saxons, and Franks; and the Romans, till the arrival of
Theodosius the Elder, were defeated in several engagements: but that
General having routed some parties of the enemy, entered the city of
London in triumph. And we are told by _Am. Marcel, lib. 27._ that
Theodosius, by repairing some cities and castles, and fortifying others,
left every thing in so good a situation, that peace was preserved in
Britain till the departure of the Romans in the reign of the Emperor
Honorius.

Dr. Woodward, in the year 1707, had an opportunity of narrowly observing
its fabrick and composition, by a part of the wall near Bishopsgate
being pulled down, to make way for new buildings; and this learned
antiquary observes, that “From the foundation, which lay eight feet
below the present surface, quite up to the top of the oldest part, which
was in all near ten feet, it was compiled alternately of layers of broad
flat bricks and rag-stones. The bricks lay in double ranges, and each
brick being but one inch and three tenths in thickness, the whole layer,
with the mortar, exceeded not three inches. The layers of stone were not
two feet thick of our measure. It is probable they were intended for two
of the Roman, their rule being somewhat shorter than ours. To this
height the workmanship was after the Roman manner, and these were the
remains of the ancient wall. In this it was very observable, that the
mortar was so very firm and hard, that the stone itself as easily broke.
It was thus far, from the foundation upwards, nine feet in thickness.
The above broad thin bricks were all of Roman make, and of the very sort
we learn from Pliny, that were in common use among the Romans. Measuring
some of these (says Mr. Woodward) I found them seventeen inches and four
tenths in thickness, and eleven inches and six tenths in breadth.

“The old wall, on its being repaired, was carried up of the same
thickness to eight or nine feet in height; or if higher, there was no
more of that work now standing. All this was apparently additional, and
of a make later than the other part underneath it, which was levelled
and brought to a plane for the raising of this new work upon it. The
outside, or that towards the suburbs, was faced with a coarse sort of
stone, not compiled with any great care or skill, nor disposed into a
regular method; but on the inside there appeared more marks of
workmanship and art. At the bottom were five layers composed of flint
and free stone; though they were not so in all parts, yet in some the
squares were near equal, about five inches diameter, and ranged in a
quincunx order. Over these were a layer of brick, then of hewn free
stone, and so alternately brick and stone to the top. These bricks, of
which there were four courses, were of the shape of those now in use,
but much larger, being near eleven inches in length, five in breadth,
and somewhat above two and a half in thickness. There was not one of the
Roman bricks above mentioned in all this part, nor was the mortar here
near so hard, as in that below; but from the description may be easily
collected, that this part when first made, with so various and orderly a
disposition of the materials, flint, stone, and brick, could not but
carry a very handsome aspect. Whether this was done at the expence of
the Barons in the reign of King John; or of the citizens in the reign of
King Henry III. or of King Richard II. or at what other time, I cannot
take upon me to ascertain, from accounts so defective and obscure as are
those which at this day remain of this affair.

“Upon the additional work now described, was raised a wall wholly of
brick, only that it terminating in battlements, these were topped with
copings of stone. It was two feet four inches in thickness, and somewhat
above eight feet in height. The bricks of these were of the same module
and size with those of the part underneath, How long they have been in
use is uncertain.” _Woodward’s Roman Antiquities, and Present State of
London._

A tower of the same construction, twenty-six feet in height, is still
remaining, and is situated almost opposite the end of Gravel lane, on
the west side of Houndsditch, tho’ much decayed. There is a door within
the wall of this tower, in Shoemaker row, fronting the passage into
Duke’s Place. Mr. Maitland observes, that in searching for this tower,
about eighty paces south east, towards Aldgate, he discovered another of
the same construction, twenty-one feet high, perfectly found, and much
more beautiful than the former; the bricks being as found as if but
newly laid, while the stones in most parts are become a sacrifice to
time. Mr. Maitland also observes, that on the south of Aldgate, at the
lower end of a street denominated the Vineyard, is the basis of another
Roman tower, about eight feet high, which supports a new building of
three stories in height. He conjectures, that the wall, when first
erected, was about twenty-two feet high, and the towers about forty
feet; and adds, that the ancients thought it so necessary to preserve
them from ruin and all incumbrances, that they made an act, that no
tenement should be erected nearer the walls, than the distance of
sixteen feet.

The remains of the walls are at present much more extensive than is
generally imagined. They still subsist in part between the houses on the
east side of Poor Jewry lane, and the Minories, almost all the way along
the back of Houndsditch, from Aldgate to Bishopsgate. The ruins of the
wall are from thence visible to every passenger in the street, from
where Little Moorgate lately stood to the end of Aldermanbury, and from
thence extending behind the houses, it reaches to Cripplegate; from
whence it extends on the back of St. Giles’s church, and runs along the
back of the houses in Crowder’s well alley, where several lofty towers
are still to be seen, and is visible almost to Aldersgate; from thence
it extends along the back of the houses in Bull and Mouth street; but
from thence little of it is to be seen till we come to Newgate; after
which it in some places rises to a considerable height, and extends in a
pretty regular line on the back of the houses in the Old Bailey almost
to Ludgate.


LONDON WALL, a long street, so called from its fronting the city wall;
it having a range of houses on the south, and the ruins of the wall on
the north. This street, which extends from Wormwood street to
Cripplegate, is the only place where the wall is not concealed by
buildings: but here the wall may be justly considered as a nuisance, it
being little better than a disagreeable heap of rubbish, in which hardly
any of the Roman structure is now to be seen.


LONDON WORKHOUSE, a large and commodious brick building, at the south
east corner of Half Moon alley in Bishopsgate street, was founded by act
of Parliament in the year 1649, for the relief and employment of the
poor, and the punishing of vagrants and other disorderly persons, within
the city and liberties of London. However, in the year 1662, the
continual increase of the poor, and the defects in the laws relating to
the settlement of them, occasioned another act, by which the Governors
were constituted a body corporate with a common seal; the Lord Mayor for
the time being was appointed President, and the President and Governors
were allowed to purchase lands or tenements to the annual value of 300l.
The Common Council were allowed to rate the several parishes of the city
for the support of this workhouse, and on this account a considerable
sum is paid by each parish, raised on the inhabitants by a regular
assessment. Besides which, this charity has received many considerable
benefactions.

However, it was agreed by the Governors, that no child should be
received from any benefactor who gave a less sum than 50l. but whoever
gave 70l. might put in a child from any place he thought fit. _Account
of this Corporation published in 1713._

The several parishes, besides their assessments, formerly paid 1s. a
week for parish children; but in 1751 the Governors came to a
resolution, that no more children paid for by the parishes to which they
belong, should be taken into the house; and since that time it has been
resolved, that only such children should be taken in, as were committed
by the Magistrates of the city, found begging in the streets, pilfering
on the keys, or lying about in glass houses and uninhabited places: the
receptacles of the wretched and the wicked.

These once poor abandoned children are educated according to the usage
of the church of England, and meet at six in the morning and evening in
a large room, which serves them both for a chapel and dining room, where
they hear prayers: they are taught the Catechism; have a Minister who
attends upon them; and on Sundays they all go to church at Great St.
Helen’s. A part of the day is appropriated to their learning to read,
write, and to their obtaining some knowledge of arithmetic; the rest of
their time is spent in weaving nets for the British fishery; and the
girls are employed in sewing, knitting, and other labour, by which they
are qualified for service. The boys making twenty-five yards of netting
a week, at 1s. 6d. for twenty yards; and, as an encouragement to
industry, every boy who makes above twenty-four yards, receives a penny
a week. There are here seldom less than four hundred children thus
employed, all of whom are dressed in russet cloth, and wear a round
badge upon their breasts, representing a poor boy and a sheep, with the
motto, _God’s providence is our inheritance_.

These children thus saved from the miseries of vice and beggary; from
becoming pick-pockets and house-breakers, and from ending their days at
the gallows; after being thus instructed and inured to labour, are put
out apprentice, the boys to the sea service or to trades, and the girls
to service in honest families.

It will be no unpleasing amusement, if we here give the speech of John
Trusty, one of these poor boys, to her Majesty Queen Anne, upon her
coming to dine at Guildhall, on Thursday the 29th of October 1702, the
Lord Mayor’s day; nor can we better conclude what we have said of these
children.

“May it please your most excellent Majesty, to pardon this great
presumption in us poor children, who throw ourselves at your royal feet,
among the rest of your glad subjects, that here in crouds appear to
behold your sacred Majesty.

“We, Madam, have no fathers, no mothers, no friends; or, which is next
to none, those who, through their extreme poverty, cannot help us. God’s
providence is our inheritance [_pointing to the motto on his breast_.]
All the support we have is from the unexhausted charities of your loyal
citizens of London, and others your good subjects, and the pious care of
our Governors, who are now teaching our little hands to work, and our
fingers to spin.

“These threads, Madam, [_holding out some yarn, which he held in his
hand_] are some of the early fruits of our industry. We are all daily
employed on the staple manufacture of England, learning betimes to be
useful to the world. And there seemed nothing wanting to complete our
happiness, but the opportunity which this day affords us, of being the
objects of your tender pity and compassion. One gracious smile from your
Majesty on this new foundation will make us live——and live to call you
blessed.

“And may God Almighty long preserve your Majesty, for the good of these
your kingdoms, and your Royal Consort the Prince. So pray we, your
little children: and let all your people say, _Amen_.”

In another part of the house, called _the Keeper’s Side_, are kept
beggars, vagrants, dissolute and abandoned sturdy fellows, who have no
honest means of support; and the lewd women who are taken up in the
streets, where they spread debauchery and contagion among unwary youth:
all these are kept to hard labour, and employed in beating of hemp and
washing of linen. Many of these have been brought to a sense of their
crimes, while others have voluntarily transported themselves to the
plantations.

All these are not only supported, but in case of sickness, broken limbs,
sores, or wounds, have advice, physic and surgery gratis.

Some years ago the Governors built a very large, strong and useful
building, with three long rooms or galleries one over another, which are
filled with boys and girls at work, who have a proper number of men and
women to instruct them. They have here also a large and convenient
brewhouse for brewing their own drink, and over that a malthouse. In
short, every thing here is managed with the greatest prudence and
œconomy. _Maitland._


LONDON WORKHOUSE _yard_, by the London Workhouse in Bishopsgate street.


LONG ACRE, so called from its being built on a long narrow piece of
ground, anciently called The Seven Acres. It begins at Drury lane, by
the end of Great Queen street, and reaches to St. Martin’s lane.


LONG ALLEY, 1. Black Friars. 2. Cable street. 3. Moor fields. 4. In the
Strand.


LONG BOW STRING MAKERS, a company by prescription, and not by charter:
but which still subsists, though bows and arrows have been so long out
of use. It has, however, a coat of arms, and is governed by two Wardens
and nineteen Assistants; but this fraternity have neither hall nor
livery. _Maitland._


LONG CELLAR _court_, 1. Lower East Smithfield. 2. St. Catharine’s.


LONG _court_, near Whitechapel.


LONG _ditch_, Tothill street, Westminster. This street took its name
from a water course there so called. _Maitland._


LONG _lane_, 1. Aldersgate street. 2. Barnaby street. 3. Shoreditch.


LONG _walk_, 1. Christ’s hospital. 2. Cross Keys court, Whitecross
street, Cripplegate. 3. King John’s court, Barnaby street.


LONG’S _alley_, Roper lane in Crucifix lane, Barnaby street.†


LONG’S _court_, 1. Jamaica street, Rotherhith.† 2. Near Leicester
fields.†


LONG’S _yard_, 1. East Smithfield.† 2. In the Green Walk.†


LOOKER’S _court_, King’s street, Oxford street.†


LOOM _alley_, Old Bethlem.


LORD MAYOR. See _Lord_ MAYOR.


LORD MAYOR’S _court_. See _Lord_ MAYOR’S COURT.


LORD MAYOR AND ALDERMENS COURT. Also see under the article MAYOR.


_House of_ LORDS, an edifice situated near Westminster Hall, by the
Painted Chamber and Court of Requests. The print represents the stairs
up which his Majesty enters, and adjoining is the office of ordnance.

Formerly the parliaments of England were held in Westminster Hall; but
King Richard II. having occasion to call one in the year 1397, when that
building was in a very ruinous condition, erected an house on purpose in
the middle of the palace court, at a small distance from the gate of the
old Hall. This was a plain and mean structure, open to the common
people, that all might hear what passed; while the King’s person, and
those assembled there for the service of the nation, were secured by a
guard of archers maintained at the public expence. Two years after,
Westminster Hall being rebuilt and sufficiently accommodated for the
meeting of this great assembly, they met there again; till at length a
taste for regularity and magnificence increasing with our improvements
in arts, this noble room was taken for the great assembly of the
national senate.

This room is spacious, lofty, and every thing within it is disposed with
great regularity. It is hung with tapestry, representing the defeat of
the Spanish armada, which is shewn in various designs; as, the first
appearance of the Spanish fleet; the several forms in which it lay at
different times on our coasts, and before the comparatively handful of
English which pursued it; the place and disposition of the fleets when
engaged; and, in fine, its departure. These are the great subjects. The
whole is excellently performed, and as the materials in that original
state are perishable, the late Mr. Pine has perpetuated them in very
fine engravings. _English Architecture._ These designs are certainly
well adapted to the place, as they perpetually present to view the
importance of our navy, on which our principal strength depends.

At the upper end of the room is the throne, upon which the King is
seated on solemn occasions, in his robes, with the crown on his head,
and adorned with all the ensigns of majesty.

On the right hand of the throne is a seat for the Prince of Wales, and
on the left, for the next person of the Royal Family.

Behind the throne are places for the young Peers who have no votes in
the house.

At a small distance below the throne, on the King’s right hand, are the
seats of the two Archbishops, and a little below them the bench of
Bishops. On the opposite side of the house, sit those Peers who rank
above Barons; the President of the King’s Council, and the Lord Privy
Seal, if they are Barons, here sit above all Dukes, Marquises, and
Earls; and the Marshal, Lord Steward, and Lord Chamberlain, sit above
all others of the same degree of nobility with themselves.

Just before the throne are the woolpacks across the room, on which are
seated the Dignitaries of the law. The Lord High Chancellor, or Keeper
of the Great Seal, sits on that nearest the throne, with his great seal
and mace by him; he is Speaker of the house of Lords. On the other two
woolpacks which are placed parallel to this, sit the Lord Chief Justice,
the Master of the Rolls, and the other Judges. These have no vote in the
house, but they are advised with in points of law, on all occasions
wherein a knowledge of the laws is necessary. The reason why all these
sages are placed on woolpacks, may probably be to remind them of the
great importance of wool and sheep to this nation.

The Clerk of the Crown, who is concerned in all writs of Parliament, and
the Clerk of the Parliament, who records every thing done there, sit on
a form behind a table.

Without the bar sits the King’s first Gentleman Usher, called the Black
Rod, from a black wand he carries in his hand. Under him is a Yeoman
Usher, who waits at the inside of the door, a Crier without, and a
Serjeant at Mace, who always attends the Lord Chancellor.

When the King is present with the crown on his head, the Lords sit
uncovered, and the Judges stand till his Majesty gives them leave to
sit.

In the King’s absence the Lords, at their entrance, do reverence to the
throne, as is done by all who enter the presence chamber. The Judges
then may sit, but may not be covered, till the Lord Chancellor or Keeper
signifies to them, that the Lords give them leave to be so. The King’s
Counsel and Masters in Chancery also sit; but may on no account be
covered.

Upon the days when the King goes in state to the house, either at the
opening or breaking up of the sessions, the Park guns are discharged;
and his Majesty arriving at the house of Lords, enters a room adjoining
to it, called the Prince’s Chamber, where he puts on his robes and
crown, and from thence is conducted into the house by the Lord
Chamberlain, where all the Lords are dressed in their scarlet robes, and
being seated on the throne, sends for the Commons by the Gentleman Usher
of the Black Rod. On their appearing, his Majesty’s speech is read by
the Lord Chancellor to this grand united Assembly; after which his
Majesty returns in the same manner as he came, in his state coach drawn
by eight fine horses, attended by his guards, and the guns firing.

A stranger cannot any way form a more just notion of the dignity of the
English nation, than by attending this noble and august Assembly, when
the King is present, with the crown upon his head, and not only his
Majesty, but all the Lords are in their robes, and the Commons attending
without the bar.

This house, in conjunction with the King and Commons, has the power not
only of making and repealing laws; but of constituting the supreme
judicature of the kingdom; the Lords here assembled take cognizance of
treasons and high crimes committed by their Peers, and others; try all
who are impeached by the Commons; and acquit or condemn without taking
an oath, only laying the right hand upon their breasts, and saying
_Guilty_, or _Not guilty upon my honour_. They receive appeals from all
other courts, and even sometimes reverse the decrees of Chancery: and
from this highest tribunal lies no appeal.

All the Lords Spiritual and Temporal have the peculiar privilege of
appointing proxies to vote in their stead, when from sickness or any
other cause, they cannot conveniently appear: but such as would make
proxies are obliged, at the beginning of every Parliament, to enter them
in person.

The Lords give their suffrages or votes, beginning at the puisne, or
lowest Baron, and then proceeding in a regular series, every one
answering apart, _Content_, or _Not content_. If the affirmatives and
negatives are equal, it passes in the negative, the Speaker not being
allowed a voice, unless he be a Peer of the realm. _Chamberlain’s
Present State._ See _House of_ COMMONS.


LORINERS, or _Bitt-makers_, appear to have been an ancient company,
though they were not incorporated by letters patent till the tenth of
Queen Anne, in the year 1712, by the name of _The Master, Wardens,
Assistants, and Commonalty of Lorimers, London_. They are governed by a
Master, two Wardens, and twenty-four Assistants, with a livery of
sixty-nine members.

They have a small but convenient hall, adjoining to London Wall, at the
end of Basinghall street.


LOTHBURY, extends from Cateaton street to Throgmorton street. This
street, which Mr. Stow says was anciently called _Lathbery_ and
_Loadbery_, he imagines took its name from its being chiefly possessed
by founders, who cast candlesticks, chafing dishes, &c. which they
afterwards turned with the foot to make them smooth and bright; and
making a _loathsome_ noise in the opinion of the passengers who were
unused to it, the street was thence called _Loathbury_: but it more
probably took its name from these things being turned by the lath, as
they evidently were, even from his description; and that Lathbery was
afterwards corrupted to Loathbury.


LOVE _court_, 1. George alley, Shoe lane. 2. Gravel lane. 3. Love lane,
Mutton lane. 4. Old Horselydown. 5. Petticoat lane. 6. St. Olave street.


LOVE _lane_, 1. Bank side, Southwark. 2. Broad Sanctuary. 3. Old Gravel
lane. 4. Rotherhith Wall. 5. Thames street. 6. Willow street, Bank side.
7. Wood street, Cheapside.


LOVEL’S _court_, Pater noster row, so called from the family of the
Lovels, who had a large house in Ivy lane, called Lovel’s Inn, which
formerly belonged to the Earls of Britain. _Stow._


LOVEL’S _rents_, Gravel lane.†


LOVEL’S _yard_, Whitecross street, Old street.†


LOVER GUN _alley_, Green Bank, Wapping.


LOVE’S _yard_, Old Horselydown lane.†


LOW LEYTON or LEIGHTON, a village pleasantly situated on the side of a
hill near Walthamstow, at the foot of which runs the river Lee. In this
parish are several handsome seats belonging to wealthy citizens, and
other gentlemen; especially the ancient manor house and seat of
Ruckholts, which some time ago belonged to Benjamin Collyer, Esq; of
whom it was purchased by the Earl Tylney: but of late years this seat
has been deserted by its owners, and not long since was converted into a
public breakfasting house, and so continued for about six years, during
which it was much frequented by gentlemen and ladies. But it is now
pulled down, and the materials sold.

Goring House, also called the Forest House, is loftily situated fronting
the forest. It once belonged to the Abbot of Waltham, and afterwards
came to the Gorings Earls of Norwich; after which it was in the
possession of Sir Gilbert Heathcote, whole descendant sold it to Mr.
Bosanquet of London, merchant.

The beautiful seat of the late Sir Fisher Tench, Bart. is a more modern
structure, adorned with large and delightful gardens, with plantations,
walks, groves, mounts, and canals stocked with fish and fowl: but Sir
Fisher’s successors have lately sold it to Mr. John Stanniland of
London, haberdasher.

The manor house of Leyton has a fine prospect over the marsh and river
towards Hackney; this, together with a paddock, was sold by Mr. David
Gansel, Lord of the manor, to the late Sir John Strange, who improved
this seat with additional buildings and handsome gardens; but his son
John Strange, Esq; has lately parted with his interest in it to Mr.
Bladen.

This parish is washed on one side by the river Lee or Ley, from which
the village obtains its name, and rises in a gentle ascent for about two
miles, from the river to Waltham Forest: on which side lies one ward of
the parish called Leyton Stone, in a pleasant and healthful situation,
insomuch that the number of the inhabitants being greatly increased, a
chapel of ease has been lately built for their convenience.

The parish church is a small building consisting of a chancel and two
isles. It is dedicated to the Virgin Mary; and the patronage of the
vicarage is vested in Mr. Gansel.


LOWER _court_, Little Minories.


LOWER GUN _alley_, Green Bank, Wapping.


LOWER SHADWELL, near Shadwell dock.


LOWER _street_, 1. East Smithfield. 2. Islington. 3. Shadwell.


LOWER TURNING _lane_, Shadwell.


LOWER WELL _alley_, Green Bank, Wapping.


LOWER WET DOCK, near Deptford.


LOWER’S _yard_, Long Walk, King John’s court.†


LOWMAN’S _pond_, a narrow street or lane in Southwark, so called from
its being built on a spot which was before a pond. In this street is the
house of ——— Clark, Esq; the front of which faces the garden. It is
remarkable, that this front, which has a mixture of Gothic and modern
architecture, is completely covered with flints and shells; as are also
the garden walls, which are crowned with little turrets of grotto work;
the garden is laid out with great order, and every thing has a neat,
whimsical, and grotesque appearance.


LOWMAN’S _street_, Gravel lane.†


LUCAS’S _alley_, Quaker street, Spitalfields.†


LUCAS’S _street_, Rotherhith.†


LUCAS’S _yard_, Cock alley, Wapping.†


LUDGATE, is situated 797 feet south of Newgate, and according to Geffry
of Monmouth, took its name from King Lud; but as that historian has
justly forfeited all credit among the learned, his assertion has no
weight; for it is certain that the ancient Britons had no walled towns.
The name of this gate is therefore with much greater propriety derived
from its situation near the rivulet Flood, Flud, Vloet, Fleote or Fleet,
which ran into Fleet Ditch.

The present gate was erected in the year 1586, with the statue of Queen
Elizabeth on the west front, and those of the pretended King Lud, and
his two sons Androgeus and Theomantius or Temanticus on the east.
_Strypes edit. of Stow._


LUDGATE PRISON. This gate was in the year 1373, constituted a prison for
poor debtors, who were free of the city, and was afterwards greatly
enlarged by Sir Stephen Forster. This gentleman had been a poor
prisoner, and was begging at the gate, when a rich widow going by, asked
him what sum would procure his discharge? To which he replied, Twenty
pounds. This sum, which at that time was a very considerable one, she
generously disbursed; and taking him into her service, he, by his
indefatigable application to business, and his obliging behaviour,
gained the affections of his mistress, and married her; after which he
had such extraordinary success in trade, that he became Lord Mayor of
London, and was honoured with Knighthood. Sir Stephen, in the midst of
his great prosperity, thought of the place of his confinement, and
having acquainted his Lady with a design he had formed of enlarging the
prison, she also resolved to contribute to its execution. They caused
several of their houses near the gate to be pulled down, and in their
stead erected a strong, square stone building, containing the following
rooms, viz. the porch, the paperhouse, the watch-hall, the upper and
lower lumberies, the cellar, the long ward, and the chapel, in which
last there is the following inscription:

“This chapel was erected and ordained for the divine worship and service
of God, by the Right Honourable Sir Stephen Forster, Knight, some time
Lord Mayor of this honourable city, and by Dame Agnes his wife, for the
use and godly exercise of the prisoners in this prison of Ludgate,
_anno_ 1454.”

These worthy founders not only settled a salary for a Chaplain of this
prison, which our author supposes is in the hands of the Lord Mayor and
Court of Aldermen, or some others by their appointment; but ordered that
all the rooms in these additional buildings should be for ever free to
all unfortunate citizens, and that they, on providing their own bedding,
should pay nothing at their discharge for lodging or chamber rent: but
the avaricious keepers have long ago broke thro’ this appointment, and
contrary to the express orders of the donor, take rent for the rooms he
built for the sole use of the poor.

As the domestic government of this prison is very singular and
remarkable, we shall give a compendious account of it, from a work
published some time ago, by one who had been long a prisoner there.

For the government of the prison, and the punishment of crimes and
misdemeanors committed therein, the master keeper and prisoners chuse
from among themselves a reader of divine service; an upper steward,
called the master of the box; an under steward; seven assistants, who by
turns officiate daily; a running assistant; two church-wardens; a
scavenger; a chamberlain; a running post; and the criers or beggars at
the grates, who are generally six in number.

The reader is chosen by the master keeper, stewards, and assistants, and
not at a general election, as the other officers are. Besides reading
prayers, he was formerly obliged to ring the bell twice a day for
prayers, and also for the space of a quarter of an hour before nine at
night, as a warning for all strangers to depart the prison; but on
account of the dignity of his office, he is now exempted from these
servile employments, and others in his stead are appointed to perform
them. The reader’s salary is 2s. 8d. _per_ month; a penny of every
prisoner at his entrance, if his garnish amount to sixteen pence; and a
dish of meat out of the Lord Mayor’s basket.

The upper steward, or master of the box, is by all the prisoners held in
equal esteem with the keeper of the prison. To him is committed the
keeping of all the several orders of the house, with the accounts of
cash received upon legacies; the distribution of all the provisions sent
in by the Lord Mayor, and others; and the cash received by garnish and
begging at the grates, which he weekly lays out in bread, candles, and
other necessaries. He also keeps a list of all the prisoners, as well
those that are upon the charity, as those that are not; to each of whom,
by the aid of the assistant for the day, he distributes their several
proportions of bread and other provisions. He receives the gifts of the
fishmongers, poulterers, and other market people, sent in by the clerk
of the market, by the running post, for which he gives a receipt; and
afterwards, in the presence of the assistant for the day, exposes all to
sale to the charity men, by way of market; and the money arising thereby
is deposited in the common stock.

This officer, with the under steward, assistants, and church-wardens,
are elected monthly by the suffrages of the prisoners; but all the other
officers, except the chamberlain, are appointed by the master keeper,
stewards, and assistants. These frequent elections are designed to
prevent frauds and abuses in the respective officers; but when they are
known to be men of probity, they are generally re-elected, and often
continue in their posts many months.

The under steward is an assistant to the upper steward, in whose absence
or indisposition, he performs the several functions of his office.

The assistants, who are seven in number, are chosen monthly with the
stewards, and one of them officiates daily. His business is, to attend
in the hall, to enter all charities, and keep an account of the money
taken out of the boxes, which are opened at five o’clock in the
afternoon, and at nine at night. This money he pays to the upper
steward, at the passing of whose accounts the stewards are auditors.

Every person nominated for the office of an assistant, on refusing to
serve, forfeits one shilling to the use of the public, or instead
thereof is put in fetters for three days. The officiating assistant is
invested with the power of a magistrate, and can commit a prisoner to
the stocks or shackles, for the abuse of any person. He is to see the
cellar cleared every night, by ten o’clock, of all the prisoners; for
which he receives 6d. out of the charity money; 2d. of which is for his
own use; 2d. for the upper steward; and 2d. for the running assistant.
This office was anciently in such esteem, that the assistant at his
entering upon it, used to be ushered into the hall at eight o’clock at
night, by forty or fifty great candles lighted, and carried by so many
prisoners.

The running assistant attends upon the criers at the grates to change
money; he opens the boxes; puts up candles in their respective places;
attends upon the stewards and assistants; looks after the clock; rings
the bell for prayers, and is crier at the sale of provisions. His salary
is 4s. 8d. _per_ month, and an eighth part of the garnish.

The church-wardens are chosen from among the youngest prisoners. The
upper warden’s business is to call to prayers on Sundays, after the bell
has done ringing; and the under warden’s is to call the prisoners to
prayers all other days. They likewise take cognizance of all persons
upon the charitable foundation; who in default of attendance are fined
one penny each. For this service the under warden has a salary of 4d.
_per_ month; and when duly elected, the penalty for not serving is 4d.

The scavenger’s office is to keep clean the prison, and to fetter, or
put offenders in the stocks: for which he is intitled to receive one
penny from each criminal, together with a salary of 5s. 8d. _per_ month,
and 2d. out of every sixteen pence of the garnish money.

The chamberlain, who is chosen by the keeper of the prison, takes care
of all the bedding and linen belonging to the keeper; places men at
their coming in; furnishes them with sheets, and gives notice to the
strangers to leave the prison by ten o’clock at night. This officer was
formerly obliged to make the charity mens beds, for which he received
two pence a month.

The running post’s employment is fetching in a basket the broken meat
from the Lord Mayor’s table, provisions from the clerk of the market,
private families, and charities given in the streets; which when so
inconsiderable as not to admit of being divided among them all, are
publicly sold, as before. The salary annexed to this office is 4s. a
month; one penny out of each man’s dividend, and one penny out of every
sixteen pence of garnish money.

The criers are six in number; two of whom daily beg at the grates: he at
the grate within, is allowed one fourth of what is given, and he at that
on Blackfriars side, one half of what is given there.

The Monday after every monthly election, the accounts are audited and
passed, and the balance divided; but if it amounts to 3s. 4d. _per_ man,
the keeper of the prison, says our author, arbitrarily extorts from each
prisoner 2s. 4d. without the least colour of right: but if the dividend
rises not so high, he then only takes 1s. 2d. the other moiety of the
2s. 4d. being charged to the prisoners account, to be paid at the time
of his discharge. Another great grievance the prisoners labour under,
is, their being obliged to pay the turnkey 12s. _per_ month, for no
other service than that of opening the door to let in gifts and
charities sent to the prison, which often amount to little more than
what he receives. _Johnson’s Description of Ludgate._

It is, however, necessary to inform the reader, that this account was
printed many years ago; and indeed it is to be hoped that these
grievances are already remedied; if they are not, it is high time that
they were; for here justice and humanity loudly call for a reformation.

The annual sums paid to this prison by the several companies, and other
regular benefactions, amount to upwards of 62l. besides a hind quarter
of beef and a peck of oatmeal from the tallow chandlers company;
nineteen stone of beef and five dozen of bread from the ironmongers
company, and the provisions sent in by the Lord Mayor and other
benefactors.


  _The fees to be taken by the keeper of Ludgate, and the turnkeys under
    him, allowed of, and confirmed at a court of Aldermen, held on the
    19th of January 1686._

At the coming in of every prisoner 1s. to the turnkey, and 2d. to the
officer who conducts him thither.

The keeper finding and providing beds, bedding, mats and cords, sheets,
blankets, and coverlets, the prisoners pay him for the bed lodging 3d.
_per_ night; for the second lodging 2d. and for the third or meanest
lodging 1d. _per_ night.

The keeper is to provide clean sheets every month for all his beds, and
the prisoners who lie in them are to pay monthly to the chamberlain for
washing them, 8d. between them, and no more.

But when the prisoners find their own beds and bedding, which the keeper
is by no means to hinder, the prisoner is only to pay 3d. _per_ week for
bed-room; or for chamber-room 4d. at the most _per_ week; and not above
two to lie in a bed.

If the prisoner by his inability can go no farther than a couch, he is
to pay only one penny _per_ week for chamber-room, and only one penny
_per_ week for lamps and candles, which the keeper is to provide.

For every prisoner’s discharge the keeper is to receive 2s. and no more.
For all actions and writs against him he is to pay the keeper only 1s.
and not 1s. for every action, and 2s. 6d. for every writ, as was
formerly taken.

The keeper shall not presume to take any other fees upon any pretence,
demand, or allowance whatsover, for execution-money, action-money, or
writ-money.


By the following account the reader may see how these orders are now
obeyed.

  _The charges of prisoners at their entrance into Ludgate; and
    dismission from thence._

A freeman of London being arrested by an action entered in either of the
Compters, may refuse to go thither, and insist on being carried
immediately to Ludgate; but the officers will extort from him 4 or 5s.
as their fee for carrying him thither, though their due is but 2d.

On his being brought to Ludgate, the turnkey enters his name and
addition in a book kept for that purpose; for which entry the prisoner
pays 1s. 2d. after which the chamberlain furnishes him with a lodging at
the rate of 1d. 2d, or 3d. _per_ night; but demands 1s. 6d. for sheets;
and before he goes to rest, his fellow prisoners demand 4s. for garnish,
which, if he does not pay, his cloaths are privately taken from him at
night, and not returned till he has raised the money the next day. The
steward also demands 1s. 6d. of him for coals, candles, and the use of
the house.

He is however allowed the liberty of going abroad; which he may do
either with a keeper, or upon giving good security to return at night.
If he goes out with a keeper, he must pay 2s. 6d. to the head turnkey,
and 1s. 6d. to the keeper who attends him; and every day he goes abroad
afterwards, 1s. to the keeper, and as much to the turnkey. A bond is
also given for the payment of his lodging to the master keeper, for
which the turnkey takes at least 5s. as his fee.

If the prisoner pays the debt, and discharges all other actions against
him in either Compter, he, upon his dismission, pays 2s. to the master
keeper; 1s. 2d. to the turnkey; 1s. for every action entered against
him; and if he is charged in execution, 2s. 6d. for every action against
him. These fees and his lodging sometimes amount to as much as the debt.
_Maitland, the last edit. printed in 1757._


LUDGATE _hill_, a spacious and handsome street, which extends from
Ludgate down to Fleet bridge.


LUDGATE _street_, begins at the west end of St. Paul’s, and ends at
Ludgate. It is a very spacious and handsome street, chiefly inhabited by
silk mercers and woollen drapers.


_St._ LUKE’S, in Old street, was erected on account of the great
increase of buildings in the parish of St. Giles, Cripplegate; for
notwithstanding there being a chapel of ease, and several
meeting-houses, the parish church could not contain half the inhabitants
who were desirous of assembling there to attend divine worship. The
Commissioners for erecting the fifty new churches taking this into
consideration, purchased a piece of ground in this parish, and erected
one of those churches upon it; after which the inhabitants applying to
Parliament, had the Middlesex liberty of St. Giles appointed for the
parish; and by the same act 3500l. was granted to be laid out in fee
simple, for the support of a Rector, besides the profits of which the
church-wardens were to pay him annually 120l. to be raised by burial
fees.

The church was finished in 1732, and was consecrated the next year on
St. Luke’s day, when the name of that saint was given as its patron.
Though the building is convenient and well enlightened with two rows of
windows, it is a very singular structure. In the center of the west
front is the entrance, adorned with coupled Doric pilasters; and to this
door is an ascent by a small strait flight of steps. Over the entrance
is a round window, and on each side a small tower covered with a dome,
and ornamented with two windows in front, one of the usual form, and
another over it, answering to that over the door. The tower is carried
up square, and behind it the roof of the church forms to the west a kind
of pediment, broken by the rise of the tower to which it joins on each
side. The uppermost stage of the tower diminishes very considerably, and
this, which is the base of an obelisk, supports on each side a dial.
From hence rises, as a steeple, a fluted obelisk, which reaches to a
great height, diminishing slowly, and being of a considerable thickness
towards the top, the upper edges are sloped off. In short, the whole is
terminated by a ball and fane.

The advowson of this church is in the Dean and Chapter of St. Paul’s,
and it is not to be held _in commendam_; all licences and dispensations
for that purpose being declared void by the act abovementioned.


_St._ LUKE’S HOSPITAL _for lunatics_, a neat and very plain structure,
at the north end of Moorfields. Nothing is here expended in ornament,
and we only see a building of considerable length plaistered over and
whitened, with ranges of small square windows, on which no decorations
have been bestowed.

This hospital, which takes its name from its being situated in St.
Luke’s parish, is supported by private subscriptions, and is designed as
an improvement upon Bethlem, which was incapable of receiving and
providing for the relief of all the unhappy objects for whom application
was made.

Some of the reasons for setting on foot this kind and generous design,
were, the expence and difficulty attending the admission of a patient
into the hospital of Bethlem, which had discouraged many applications
for the benefit of that charity, particularly on the behalf of the more
necessitous objects, and of such who resided in the remote parts of this
kingdom. By this unavoidable exclusion and delay many useful members
have been lost to society, either by the disease gaining strength beyond
the reach of physic, or by the patients falling into the hands of
persons unskilled in the treatment of this disorder. And many of the
unhappy persons afflicted with it, have from this delay, and the want of
being put under the care of those experienced in guarding against their
attempts, frequently committed the most fatal acts of violence on
themselves, their relations and attendants. Had they joined this to
Bethlem hospital, it would have deprived it of two of its principal
advantages, the being under the immediate inspection and government of
its own patrons and supporters; and of introducing more gentlemen of the
faculty to the study and practice of one of the most important branches
of physic.

In this hospital patients are taken in according to the order of time in
which the petitions of their friends have been delivered to the
Secretary, without favour or partiality. They are even admitted without
any expence, except only such as are parish poor must have their bedding
provided, and this they are at liberty to take away at their discharge.

On the admission of every patient, two responsible housekeepers,
residing within the bills of mortality, must enter into a bond to the
Treasurer for the time being, in the penalty of 100l. to take away such
patient within seven days after notice given them for that purpose by
the committee, or their Secretary. These securities must leave their
names with their places of abode in writing, delivered to the Secretary
at least four days before such admission, and must be approved of by the
committee: but no Governor is to be security for any patient.

The patients in this hospital are not exposed to public view; and no
money received for the use of this charity, is expended in entertaining
the general court of committee at any of their meetings.

But no person is to be admitted who has been a lunatic above twelve
calendar months; or has been discharged as incurable from any other
hospital for the reception of lunatics; or who has the venereal disease;
is troubled with epileptic or convulsive fits, or is deemed an ideot;
nor any woman with child.

The general committee receive immediately into the hospital any patient
who shall have been discharged cured, in case such patient relapses
within two months. The general committee also take in by rotation such
patients as are discharged uncured; but each of them is to pay 5s. _per_
week, till the charity is enabled to lessen that expence: but the number
of these in the house are not to exceed twenty.


     _An abstract of the rules with respect to the Governors, &c._

I. Every person paying twenty guineas or upwards, or paying five
guineas, and signing an agreement to pay the same sum for the four next
succeeding years, is admitted a Governor, except all persons acting as
Physician, Surgeon, Apothecary, or Secretary to this hospital, (other
than the six Apothecaries declared Governors at the general meeting held
on the 29th of June 1750.)

II. For transacting the business of this hospital, a general court is
held twice every year, viz. on the second Wednesday in the months of
February and August, and at such general courts as are herein after
mentioned, and every general court consists of nine Governors.

III. At the general court held annually on the second Wednesday in the
month of February, one President, four Vice-Presidents, a Treasurer, a
general Committee, Physician, Surgeon, Apothecary, and Secretary, are
elected for the year ensuing. And no person acting as Physician,
Surgeon, or Apothecary to any other hospital or infirmary, can be
Physician, Surgeon, or Apothecary to this hospital.

IV. All questions are determined by the majority of Governors present,
on holding up of hands, or by a division, or by a ballot, in case it is
required by seven or more Governors before a division is begun; and in
all cases of an equality of votes, the person presiding for the time
being has the casting vote. In all debates the person speaking stands
up, and addresses himself to the chair, and no person is to speak more
than once to the same question without leave.

V. At the general court to be held annually on the second Wednesday in
August, a special committee of seven Governors, who are not of the
general committee, are appointed to audit and examine the several
accounts relating to this hospital, and report their opinion of such
accounts to the general court held on the second Wednesday in February
following,

VI. The President has power to order special general courts to be
summoned as often as he thinks necessary: and, upon every vacancy in the
office of Treasurer, Physician, Surgeon, Apothecary, or Secretary, a
general court is summoned to meet, in order to fill up the vacancy. But
no person is intitled to vote at such general court, unless he has paid
his subscription money on or before the day in which the vacancy is
declared.

VII. The general committee consists of the President, Vice-Presidents,
and Treasurer for the time being, and of the five Governors named as
lessees in the lease of the ground on which the hospital is built, and
of all persons who have paid 100l. or upwards for the use of the
hospital; and of such twenty-four Governors residing within the bills of
mortality, as are annually elected for that purpose at the general court
held on the second Wednesday in February, of which committee five at
least are necessary to do business. They meet one stated day in every
month, or oftener if they see convenient, and at such other times as the
Treasurer, or any sub-committee for the time being appoint. And have
power to hire, govern, and discharge the domestic servants of this
hospital, to keep the buildings properly repaired, and purchase
provisions, furniture, and other necessaries for the same: To admit and
discharge patients: To see that the several books relating to the
hospital be regularly kept: That all debts, legacies, annual
subscriptions, and other revenues of this hospital be received and
recovered as the same shall respectively become due: That all moneys in
the hands of the Treasurer, above what is necessary in the opinion of
the said committee for defraying the current expences of the hospital,
be from time to time placed out in transferable government securities,
and no other, in the names of the Treasurer for the time being, and two
of the Vice-Presidents, or of two such other Governors as the general
court shall appoint for that purpose: and that all just demands be
regularly discharged at least once in six months. The committee have
power to relieve any patient at his or her discharge with any sum not
exceeding 20 s.

VIII. For the more easy dispatch of business, this committee has power
to summon sub-committees, one of which is called the house committee;
and such sub-committees have power to summon the general committee as
often as they think proper.

IX. All purchases of provisions, and other materials for the use of the
hospital, are to be made as often as possible by contract. But no
contract is to be made by which any member of the committee is directly
or indirectly concerned,

X. A book intitled The Visitor’s book, is kept in the hospital, for the
Governors to enter complaints of any neglect or misconduct in the
officers or servants, these complaints being signed by such Governor’s
name, are taken into consideration, and redressed by the committee.

XI. The Physician, who is allowed to have the liberty of pupils, attends
every committee day, and one other day in the week, and as often
otherwise as there is occasion. The Surgeon also attends the hospital
every weekly committee day, and as often as there is occasion; and the
six Apothecaries who generously attend and administer their medicines
gratis, are there monthly by rotation, attending every weekly committee
day, and two other days in the week, and as often at other times as
there is occasion.

XII. That every officer or servant who shall take any fee, gratuity or
reward, directly or indirectly, from any tradesman or other person
dealing with this hospital, patient, or friend of any patient, in
respect of any service done or to be done, shall forthwith be
discharged, and rendered incapable of being received again into the
service of this hospital. Except that it shall be lawful for the
Secretary of this hospital, upon his waiting on every Governor with a
staff and a printed copy of the rules and orders of this hospital, to
accept of a fee not exceeding one guinea.

Before we conclude this article it is proper to observe, that though
this hospital was opened so lately as the 30th of July 1751, yet so
great has been the encouragement it has met with, that on the 18th of
August 1758, the clear estate of the hospital amounted to 14,502l. of
which 14,200l. were in three _per cent._ East India annuities. At that
time the number of discharged cured, amounted to 247, and those uncured
to 138. Fifty patients were in the house; besides 20 patients who had
been before discharged, and received again at 5s. _per_ week.


LUKENER’S _lane_, Drury lane.†


LUMBER _court_, West street, Soho.


LUMLEY’S _Almshouse_, in Pest-house fields, near Old street, was erected
by the Viscountess Lumley, in the year 1672, for the accommodation of
six poor women of the parishes of Bishopsgate and Aldgate; to each of
whom she granted an allowance of 4l. and twelve bushels of coals _per
annum_.


LUMLEY’S _court_, in the Strand.†


LUMLEY’S _street_, Marsham street.†


LUNN’S _court_, White’s yard.†


LUTKIN’S _corner_, Mill street.†


LYING-IN HOSPITAL, for married women, in Brownlow street, Long Acre.
Amidst the variety of charities that are the distinction and glory of
this age and nation, perhaps none has been proposed to the public more
extensive in its benefits than the hospitals in this city for lying-in
women. It is natural to observe, that the arguments for establishing any
hospital, are at least as strong when applied to these. Poverty is an
object of pity; sickness and poverty united seem to comprehend all the
natural evils of life, and how great is the calamity of those poor who
are frequently or periodically afflicted with sickness; and though their
labour is at other times a bare support, are annually disqualified for
providing for themselves and families! During the latter part of their
pregnancy, and the time of their lying-in, the needy family is wholly
taken up in attendance upon them; and the joys natural at such a season,
are suppressed by the wants which surround them. Or if they be destitute
of this attendance, how great is the hazard that the helpless mother, or
the child, or perhaps both, may by their deaths become melancholy
instances of the evils of real poverty!

By the plan of this hospital, every convenience these distressed objects
can require, is amply provided; commodious apartments and beds, good
nursing, plain suitable diet, proper medicines, the charitable
assistance of gentlemen of skill and experience in midwifery, and, on
due occasions, the spiritual comfort of a sober and pious divine.

Between the 7th of December 1749, when women were first admitted, and
the 12th of April 1751, 299 patients received orders of admission; and
the number of patients greatly increasing, four small houses contiguous
to the back of the hospital were added to it, and fitted up at a great
expence.

Women are received into this hospital in the last month of their
pregnancy, on producing a letter of recommendation from a Governor, and
making an affidavit of their marriage and their husband’s settlement,
which affidavit is prepared for them _gratis_ by the Secretary; and
where the husband cohabits with the wife, he is to join in the
affidavit, unless prevented by sickness, or some other reasonable
impediment. It is also required, that the women produce a testimonial of
their honesty and poverty, under the hands of two substantial
housekeepers in the neighbourhood where they lodge or reside, in case
the weekly board shall, on examination, doubt of their being in such
circumstances as to be proper objects of the charity.

Friday being the day appointed for the admission of women, they are to
be at the hospital by ten o’clock in the forenoon, no letters of
recommendation being received after that hour, it being necessary, for
the dispatch of the business of the hospital, that their affidavits
should be prepared and sworn to, before the weekly board sits, who enter
upon business at eleven.

During their continuance in the house, necessaries are provided for them
and their children, at the sole charge of the hospital; no money or
other gratuity is to be taken of them by the nurses, or by any of the
officers or servants of the house, on any pretence whatsoever.

That this excellent charity may be rendered more extensively useful to
the public, and that not only this great metropolis, but the remotest
parts of the kingdom may be supplied with well-instructed and
experienced midwives, four female pupils at a time are permitted to
attend the hospital, in order to their being instructed in midwifery.
These pupils must be widows or married women, not less than twenty-five
years of age, of a sober character, and such as are approved of by the
committee. These are allowed to stay and board six months in the
hospital, during which they dine at the steward’s and matron’s table.
The gentlemen of the faculty who attend the hospital, at stated times,
give them lectures in midwifery, and instruct them how to act in all
natural and difficult births. And when they are thoroughly instructed,
and sufficiently experienced, they receive from these gentlemen, on
their leaving the hospital, certificates of their qualification. The
expences of their instruction and board in the hospital have been
settled at a general court; the particulars of which any persons
desirous of becoming pupils may be informed of, by applying to the
matron of the hospital. But no pupils of the male sex are permitted to
attend this hospital.

The officers of this hospital, are, a perpetual President, four
Vice-Presidents, and a Treasurer, who are chosen annually.

Two Physicians, and two Surgeons, practising midwifery, deliver the
women in difficult cases. These gentlemen also meet at the hospital in
consultation every Tuesday morning.

A Chaplain reads divine service in the hospital, baptizes the children,
churches the women, and performs the necessary duties belonging to his
function.

An Apothecary prepares such medicines as are prescribed for the women
and children.

A Secretary keeps the accounts of the hospital, attends at general
meetings, and weekly boards, and does all other business commonly done
by the Secretaries, Clerks, or Registers at other hospitals.

A Steward takes care of the provisions and furniture, and does such
other business as belongs to his office.

A Matron, well skilled in midwifery, delivers the women in easy, natural
labours, takes care of the women, superintends the nurses, and sees
every thing necessary for the women and children provided according to
the direction of the Physicians and Surgeons. She has under her an
assistant matron.

All officers and servants of the hospital, above the rank of assistant
matron, a messenger, and nurses, are elected by ballot at a general
court of the Governors: and on any vacancy, the day of election for
filling it up is appointed at least one month, and not more than three
months, from the day such vacancy happens, unless directed otherwise by
an express order of a general court: but the inferior servants are
appointed by a weekly committee.

The qualification of an annual Governor of this charity is a
subscription of three guineas or upwards _per annum_; and of a perpetual
Governor, the payment of thirty guineas at one time, which intitles the
subscriber to recommend, and have in the house one woman at a time. A
subscription of six guineas a year, or a payment at once of sixty,
intitles the subscriber to have in the house two women at a time, and
so, in proportion, for larger sums.

Ladies subscribing the like sums have the privilege of recommending
women in the same manner as Governors. They have likewise a right of
voting in all elections at general courts, for officers and servants, by
proxy, provided such proxy be a Governor of this charity; or they may
send a letter to the board without a proxy, naming the person they vote
for, which is regarded as their vote: but no Governor is to be proxy for
more than one lady at a time.

Benefactions or subscriptions of smaller sums than those abovementioned,
are thankfully received, and properly applied to the use of the charity.

A general meeting of the Governors is held every quarter; and the sole
power of making laws and rules for the government of the hospital is
lodged in this general court.

A committee of fifteen Governors is chosen at each quarterly general
court; of whom the Treasurer for the time being is always one, and any
number of these may transact business. Every Friday morning they meet at
the hospital, to receive the women recommended, and to direct the
ordinary affairs of the house. Temporary orders are made by this
committee for the service of the hospital; but a report of these and all
their other proceedings, are made to the quarterly general court. Any
Governor of the charity may be present at this weekly committee; but
none have a right of voting there, except those who are members of the
committee, and the President or Vice-Presidents, if present. The same
rule extends to all other committees.

A special general court may, on a fortnight’s notice, be called at any
time between the quarterly courts, either by order of a general court,
or of the weekly committee; or at the demand of the Treasurer, or of any
five of the Governors; this demand being delivered in writing at the
weekly board, and signed with their respective names; the business of
such special court to be expressed in this writing, and in the summons
to the Governors. _From the account of this hospital published by order
of the Governors._ See LONDON LYING-IN HOSPITAL.

This, and the London hospital for lying-in women, must be allowed to be
truly noble charities; but many have thought them too limited, as the
relief afforded to poor distressed women in a situation that calls upon
humanity to lend them help, ease, and comfort, is confined to those who
are married: and the more unhappy women, who have the sting of guilt
added to pain, are excluded from receiving the least benefit from those
foundations. The following hospital has therefore been founded on a more
extensive plan.


LYING-IN HOSPITAL, in Duke street, Grosvenor square, for unmarried as
well as married women, who are here received and relieved, in order to
prevent the unhappy consequences that too often proceed from their
situation; such as perjuries, false affidavits, and that most formidable
and unnatural of all crimes, the murder of their poor guiltless infants.
To prevent these dreadful effects, every convenience is here amply
provided for them, commodious apartments and beds, good nursing, plain,
suitable diet, proper medicines, the charitable assistance of gentlemen
of skill and experience in midwifery, and, on due occasions, the
spiritual comfort of a sober, pious, and exemplary divine.

This hospital, which first began in Jermyn street, St. James’s, and was
from thence removed into Duke street, is governed by a President, a
Vice-President, and a Treasurer, annually elected out of the Governors,
greatest benefactors to this charity; by a general court of Governors
held in the months of March, June, September, and December, to take the
reports of the committees; and by a house committee who inspect accounts
and transact such business as is laid before them.

At the general quarterly courts a physical committee is appointed out of
the Physicians, Men-midwives, Surgeons, and Apothecaries, who are to
meet once a month to examine the medicines and drugs brought into the
dispensatory, and none are suffered to be used without their
approbation.

Two Physicians and two Surgeons attend twice a week on extraordinary
cases; a Surgeon and Man-midwife, in great business in the
neighbourhood, gives attendance at any hour of the day or night he is
called for, particularly from eleven of the clock till one, every day;
and such objects as come within these hours, have advice in physic and
surgery, without fee or reward, whether recommended or accidental.

No officers or servants are permitted, on pain of expulsion, to take any
fee, reward, or gratuity whatsoever, of patients or other persons, for
any service done or to be done in this hospital.

Every Governor or subscriber is intitled to send one in-patient at a
time, and out-patients without limitation. All subscriptions are during
pleasure; but all persons are requested to pay at the time of
subscribing. Those who contribute two guineas a year are Governors while
they continue their subscription, and those who give 20l. at one
payment, are Governors during life, and have a vote and interest at the
committees, and their attendance is esteemed a favour; but those who
subscribe less than two guineas _per annum_, are only subscribers.

The poor women recommended by the Governors and subscribers are received
on Wednesdays and Fridays, from eleven o’clock till one. _From the
account of this hospital published by order of the Governors._

For the other lying-in hospitals, besides the two above mentioned, see
the articles LONDON LYING-IN HOSPITAL, and MIDDLESEX HOSPITAL.


LYON’S INN. See _Lion’s Inn_.

[Illustration]




                                   M.


MACCLESFIELD _street_, Gerrard street, Soho.


MADDOX _street_, Swallow street.†


MAGGOT’S _court_, Piccadilly.†


MAGDALEN HOUSE, for the reception of penitent prostitutes, in Prescot
street, Goodman’s fields, is a plain, neat building, with a wall and a
small area before it. To prevent these penitents being exposed to the
public eye, the windows next the street are concealed by wood work
sloping up from the bottom of each, so as to admit the light only at the
top; the sides are also inclosed, so that there is no possibility of
these once unhappy women either seeing or being seen by any person who
passes by. This sloping projection of the blinds, placed in a regular
series before all the windows in each story, and painted white like the
walls, has a very singular appearance; for, at a distance, the house
seems falling into the street.

Though this is one of the latest of those excellent charitable
foundations that do honour to the present age, it being proposed and
carried into execution in the year 1758, there is reason to believe that
it will not be the least useful. It is obvious that there cannot be
greater objects of compassion than poor, young, thoughtless females,
plunged into ruin by those temptations to which their youth and personal
advantages expose them, no less than those passions implanted by nature
for wise, good, and great ends; surrounded by snares the most artfully
and industriously laid; snares laid by those endowed with superior
faculties, and all the advantages of education and fortune; who offer
too commonly to transport the thoughtless girls from want, confinement,
and restraint of passions, to luxury, liberty, gaiety and joy: but when
once seduced, how soon do their golden dreams vanish! abandoned by the
seducer, deserted by their friends, contemned by the world, they are not
only deprived of their innocence, and every pleasing hope of domestic
happiness, but are left to struggle with want, despair and scorn, and
even, in their own defence, to plunge deeper and deeper in sin, till
disease and death conclude a miserable being. It is too well known that
this is, sooner or later, the case with most of the prostitutes, in
their several degrees, from those pampered in private stews, to the
common dregs infesting our streets: and that far the greatest part of
those, who having taken to this dreadful life, are thus seeking disease,
death, and eternal destruction, not through choice, but necessity. The
seeds of virtue would frequently have exerted themselves; but alas!
before this foundation was formed, the possibility was removed; and the
same necessity obliging them to prey on the unwary, to diffuse
contagion, to propagate profligacy, and to spread ruin, disease, and
death, through a great part of the human species.

This godlike proposal of giving an opportunity of repentance to guilt
and shame met with a suitable encouragement, and many were willing to
afford them the means of recovering themselves from their otherwise lost
state; and instead of being pests, becoming useful members of society.

Influenced by such noble motives, a set of gentlemen, distinguished by
their humanity and generosity, entered into a private subscription,
making themselves at the same time accountable for such benefactions as
should flow in from the public. Numbers liberally contributed, and in
about three or four months time, the sums advanced by the subscribers
amounted to 3593 l. 19 s. while a great number of these unhappy guilty
objects of commiseration solicited for admission.

At a general meeting of the subscribers, a committee was appointed, and
it was determined to take the house in Prescot street which had been
lately the London infirmary; which being done, it was fitted up in the
manner above mentioned; and at another general meeting on the 28th of
June 1758, the several officers of the house were chosen, and the rules,
of which the following are an abstract, were ordered to be published.


         _Rules and regulations of the Governors and Officers._

I. That a President, four Vice-Presidents, a Treasurer, and committee of
twenty-one, be annually chosen the last Wednesday in June, and that
seven of the committee go out yearly.

II. The general courts shall consist of at least ten Governors, the
President, or Vice-President, and the Treasurer. These general courts
shall be held quarterly, viz. on the last Wednesday in March, June,
September, and December. The annual general court, in which is to be
examined all the transactions of the year, and the general state of the
hospital, and at which time the officers shall be chosen, is to be held
on the last Wednesday in June.

III. The general committee is to consist of twenty-one, five of whom
shall constitute a quorum, and the President, Vice-President, and
Treasurer shall be always of this general committee, one of whom shall
be Chairman, when present; but if none of them be present, then the said
committee may chuse their Chairman. They are to meet once a week, or
oftener, as they shall think proper: when they shall have power to
receive the persons petitioning for admittance, and to dismiss those
already admitted: to give orders in relation to the manner in which the
persons admitted shall be employed: to inspect the cloathing, furniture,
and provisions: to examine into the conduct of all the officers and
servants: and every week a sub-committee of three are jointly to visit
the wards, and make their report.

IV. A subscription of twenty guineas shall be a qualification for a
Governor for life: and an annual subscription of five guineas shall be a
qualification for a Governor for that year; this subscription, when it
shall amount to twenty-five guineas, shall be a qualification for a
Governor for life, and every such subscriber be intitled to one vote
only: but if any annual subscriber shall be more than two years in
arrear, his power as Governor shall cease till such arrears be paid. And
every lady subscribing as above, shall be intitled to vote personally,
or by proxy, provided that proxy be brought by a Governor: but no
Governor to be possessed of more than one proxy. Any five Governors
shall have power to require a general meeting, provided they address
themselves to the Treasurer by letter, expressing the business for which
that meeting is required, and signed by them respectively. All elections
to be by holding up of hands, except a ballot be required, and if there
shall be an equality of votes, the Chairman is to have the casting vote.

V. The Chaplain is to read prayers morning and evening; to pray and
preach twice every Sunday, and to administer the sacrament every month;
to attend the sick and ignorant, and to instruct them in the principles
and duties of the protestant religion. He is to attend all committees,
and make reports of what he thinks necessary for the good conduct and
benefit of the undertaking.

VI. There are two Physicians, two Surgeons, and three Apothecaries, who
are required to behave with the utmost humanity and prudence. One of
each is to attend the committee, and make weekly reports. They are all
to attend in their own persons, and no pupil, apprentice, or servant,
shall at any time be admitted into the wards; and even when the
Physicians, Surgeons, and Apothecaries visit the wards, they shall be
attended by the matron.

VII. The Matron is to direct the œconomy of the house, and constantly to
reside in it. She is to see that all the women are neat and decent in
their cloaths and persons, and properly employed; that they discharge
their duty, and constantly attend divine service: she is to receive from
the steward the materials for their work, and deliver it back to him.
She is to take care of the houshold linen, and what belongs to the
cloathing: to require from the steward such provisions as are necessary
for the house, and to see that they are not given away or wasted. She is
to keep the keys of the outward doors, which are to be delivered into
her hands after the doors are locked, at seven in the winter, and nine
in the summer; and she is to take care that the rules of the house be
strictly observed, with regard to the time of rest, diet, hours of
devotion, and every thing that relates to good order.

VIII. The Secretary is to keep the books, take minutes at all meetings,
to collect the annual subscriptions, and to give notice to such
subscribers as are more than one year in arrears, &c.

IX. The Steward is to reside constantly in the house, and to follow no
other employment than what relates to this charity. He is to receive the
respective provisions and materials for the employment of the women,
ordered by the committee, and inspect the weight, measures and quality
thereof, and to make regular entries of them; to keep an exact account
of all the work done by every respective woman, as the matron shall
deliver it to him.

X. The Porter is not to receive any letter, message, or other thing into
the house, or send out any thing without the knowledge or inspection of
the matron: he is to reside in the house, and strictly to observe the
instructions that shall be given him, in regard to visitors, letters,
&c.

XI. The Messenger is also to dwell in the house, and to be employed in
errands, and out-door business: but he is not to bring any letter,
verbal message, or other thing into the house, or to carry out any
message or other thing, without the knowledge or inspection of the
matron.

Neither the steward, porter, or messenger, shall have any communication
with the wards.

No officer, or servant of the house shall receive any money, fee,
gratuity, or reward, besides their wages.


           _Rules and regulations relating to the Penitents._

I. That the method of admission be by petition to the committee, the
printed form of which, with proper blanks to be filled up, may be had
_gratis_ by application at the house. That every petitioner be examined
as to her health, by the Physician, Surgeon, and Matron. When any
petition is approved, it shall be wrote upon, _Found proper_, and signed
by the Chairman. Every person upon admission shall subscribe to the
rules of the house, and also enter into an agreement to pay the sum of
10l. _per annum_ for her board, lodgings, and necessaries, which is to
be void, provided such person continues in the house three years, or
less time, at the option of the committee. No person admitted shall be
allowed to go out of the house without special leave in writing, signed
by the Treasurer or Chairman, and two of the committee.

II. One or more wards are to be allotted for persons newly admitted,
where they are to remain some time for a trial of their behaviour. There
shall be superiority of wards, according to the education or behaviour
of the persons admitted; and the inferior wards shall consist of meaner
persons, and of those degraded for misbehaviour. In each ward they shall
be classed, and one appointed to preside and be accountable for the
conduct and behaviour of the rest; and they shall by rotation do the
necessary offices in their respective wards, excepting the person
appointed to preside. They are also to perform the necessary offices of
the house, as they shall be directed by the matron; and an allowance
shall be made to such as perform these offices, out of the general
produce of the work done in the house, according to the proportion of
the value of their duty and labour.

III. Each person is to lie in a separate bed, and have a chest for her
cloaths and linen, under lock and key, to be kept by herself; and where
the rooms will admit of it, a small closet or apartment is to be
provided for the retirement of the most serious and best behaved, in the
intervals of their employment, and these also considered as the reward
of good conduct.

IV. Their true names must be registered, but if desirous of concealing
themselves, they may have liberty to assume a feigned name. As no
reproaches must be made for past irregularities, under the severest
injunctions; neither shall there be any inquiries made into names or
families; but all possible discouragement given to every kind of
discovery that the parties themselves do not chuse to make.

V. Upon their admission, if their apparel is in any tolerable condition,
it is to be cleaned, ticketed, and laid by, in order to be returned them
whenever they leave the house: but if such apparel be too fine for their
station, it shall be sold, and the produce brought to their account.
They are to wear an uniform of light grey, and in their whole dress to
be plain and neat.

VI. Each ward is to dine at a separate table. The matron is to dine at
the head of the table of the superior ward; and the head of each ward is
to dine at the upper end of each table, and to say grace.

VII. Each person is to be employed in some work or business according to
her ability, and have such part of the benefit arising from her labour
and ingenuity as the committee shall judge she deserves; which sum may
be increased by the bounty of the house, as favourable opportunities may
offer, for establishing them in the world. The articles proposed for
their employment are, making their own cloaths both linen and woollen;
knitting, spinning, making bone lace, black lace, artificial flowers,
childrens toys, winding silk, drawing patterns, making women and
childrens shoes, mantuas, stays, coats, &c. but no part of their labour
is to be sold in the house, but at some other place appointed by the
committee. In their work, as in every other circumstance, the utmost
care and delicacy, humanity and tenderness will be observed, that this
establishment may not be thought a house of correction, or even of hard
labour, but a safe retreat from their distressful circumstances.

VIII. From Lady-day to Michaelmas they are to rise at six and be in bed
at ten; and from Michaelmas to Lady-day are to rise at seven and be in
bed at nine; and after that time no fire or candle shall be allowed,
except in the sick ward.

IX. They are to breakfast at nine o’clock, and be allowed half an hour;
and are to dine at one o’clock, and be allowed an hour; they may leave
off work at six in the winter, and seven in summer.

X. No Governor, or any other person shall be permitted to visit the
wards, or any of the women, without leave in writing first obtained from
the Treasurer or Chairman, and two of the committee, except in cases
provided for, and in all cases the matron to attend them.

XI. Abusive or reproachful language, insolence or disobedience to the
officers, indecent or profane expressions, and such kind of turbulent
conduct, shall subject them to confinement in a room for six hours for
the first offence. For the second offence they shall be admonished
publicly by the Chaplain and the Matron; and the rest of their own ward
may be also appealed to for their disapprobation of such conduct. The
third offence shall subject them to be confined for twelve hours, and to
have but one spare meal during the whole day; and if found to be
incorrigible, then to forfeit a certain proportion, or the whole of what
hath been acquired by their labour, at the discretion of the committee,
and be subject to the consequences of their agreement; and to be
dismissed the house, and never re-admitted.

XII. After the continuance of any woman in the house for three years,
upon the modest and virtuous demeanor, and industrious conduct of such
woman, or upon application of her parents or friends, or any
house-keeper of sufficient credit, if such friends declare they will
forgive the past offences of such woman, and will provide for her; or,
if such house-keeper will receive such woman as a servant; in either of
these cases the Governors may discharge such woman with her consent.

XIII. Upon the discharge of such woman, her cloaths, or if sold, the
produce of them, shall be returned to her, together with whatever may be
due upon her account, and a certificate given her under the hands of the
Treasurer, or the President, and two or more of the committee, of her
conduct and behaviour during the time of her being in the house.

XIV. Every woman who shall be placed in a service from this house, and
shall continue one whole year in such service to the intire approbation
of such master or mistress, upon its being made appear to the
satisfaction of the committee, they may give that woman a gratuity not
exceeding two guineas, as a reward for her good behaviour.

XV. The committee will, upon the good behaviour of the women, interest
themselves to obtain a reconciliation with their parents and friends,
when their contract will be cancelled.

XVI. Besides the vouchers abovementioned, and the advantages arising
from their labour, a bounty may be given, at the discretion of the
committee, to such as shall be properly discharged. This gift shall be
presented not only to those who marry in a manner satisfactory to the
committee, but also to such as shall set up trades in whatever way they
shall have gained a proficiency; so that nothing shall be omitted which
can promote the great ends of preserving life, of rendering that life
useful, and of recovering those who are now lost to the community.

This plan is to be improved as experience may hereafter dictate.


_St._ MAGNUS’S _Church_, at the north east corner of London bridge, owes
its name to its dedication to St. Magnus, who suffered martyrdom under
the Emperor Aurelian, in the city of Cæsarea, for his steady adherence
to the Christian religion. The Abbots of Westminster and Bermondsey had
alternately the donation of the church, till the suppression of
monasteries; it then devolved to the Crown, and in 1553 was placed under
the jurisdiction of the Bishop of London. The ancient edifice was laid
in ruins by the dreadful conflagration in 1666; and ten years after, the
present structure was erected in its room, though the steeple was not
added till several years after.

It is a spacious and massy stone building; plain, and yet well
ornamented. The corners have rustic quoins, and the body is enlightened
by tall arched windows, over each of which is a cornice supported by
scrolls, and between these is a cherub over the center of each window.
At the west end coupled pilasters rise on each side the door, from a
plain course, and support a pediment. The door on the north side is also
placed under a pediment, but without the particular decorations of the
other. Over each door is an oval window, and this last is decorated with
festoons. The roof is hid by a kind of Attic course, from which the
tower rises square and plain; and from this the dial, which is very
richly ornamented, projects over the street. The course above this is
adorned at the corners with coupled pilasters of the Ionic order,
supporting an open work in the place of a balustrade, with large urns at
the corners, of an uncommon shape. From within this open work rises the
lanthorn, which has also Ionic pilasters, and arched windows in all the
intercolumniations. The dome rests upon these pilasters, and on its
crown is placed a piece of open work like that which surrounds the base
of the lanthorn. On this is raised the turret which supports the fane.

This church is a rectory, and to this parish that of St. Margaret’s, New
Fish street, is united. The Rector, besides glebes, casualties, &c.
receives 170l. a year in lieu of tithes.


MAGNUS _court_, Butcher row.


MAGPYE _alley_. 1. Aldersgate street.* 2. Ashentree court.* 3.
Bishopsgate street without.* 4. Crutched-friars.* 5. Fenchurch street.*
6. Fetter lane.* 7. Gray’s Inn lane.* 8. Phœnix street.* 9. Wheeler
street.* 10. White-friars.*


MAGPYE _court_, Great Old Bailey.*


MAID _court_, Maiden lane, Bow lane.


MAID _lane_, Gravel lane.


MAIDEN _lane_, 1. Church street, Lambeth.* 2. Extending from Deadman’s
Place to Gravel lane; a long stragling place with ditches on each side;
the passages to the houses being over little bridges.* 3. Halfmoon
street, Covent Garden.* 4. Long Ditch.* 5. Queen street, Cheapside.* 6.
Wood street, Cheapside.*


MAIDENHEAD _alley_, 1. Ratcliff.* 2. Wapping.*


MAIDENHEAD _court_, 1. Aldersgate street.* 2. Cartwright street.* 3. St.
Catharine’s.* 4. Chiswell street, Moorfields.* 5. Church lane,
Whitechapel.* 6. St. Ermin’s hill. 7. Great Eastcheap.* 8. Great
Gardens, St. Catharine’s lane.* 9. Grub street, by Fore street,
Cripplegate.* 10. London Wall.* 11. Maiden lane.* 12. Moor lane.* 13.
Saltpetre bank.* 14. St. Thomas Apostle’s.* 15. Wheeler street.* 16.
Wood street, Cheapside.*


MAIDENHEAD _passage_, Berwick street.*


MAIDENHEAD _street_, Dyot street.*


MAIDENHEAD _yard_, Dyot street.*


MAINHARD’S _court_, Anchor and Hope alley, Green Bank, near Wapping.†


MAINHARD’S _street_, Bembridge street, St. Giles’s pound.†


MAIN’S _yard_, Castle lane, Southwark.†


MALAGA _court_, Nightingale lane, East Smithfield.


MALDEN, a village in Surry, about three miles from Kingston, has a
powder mill on a stream that runs from Ewel to Kingston.


MALLET’S _court_, 1. Blackboy alley, Chick lane.† 2. Buckeridge street.†


MALLMILL _court_, Whitecross street.†


MANBY _court_, Montague street.†


MANCHESTER _court_, Canon row, Westminster; so called from the house of
the Earls of Manchester adjoining.


MANCHESTER _stairs_, Canon row, Westminster.


MAN-IN-THE-MOON _yard_, Chiswell street.*


MANLEY’S _wharf_, Mill bank, Westminster.†


MANNACK’S _alley_, Shoreditch.†


MANOR’S _street_, St. Giles’s.†


MANSEL _street_, Goodman’s fields.†


MANSION HOUSE of the Lord Mayor, a very noble edifice erected in the
place where Stocks market was formerly held. As the private houses of
the citizens advanced to the dignity of Lord Mayor, were generally
improper places, as well as too small, for transacting the great
business belonging to this important office, it was customary for the
chief magistrate of the city to hold his mayoralty at one or other of
the halls belonging to the twelve principal companies. This however was
long perceived very inconvenient; and therefore it was at last found
expedient for the honour of the city, and the more regular discharge of
that high office, to erect a house, as the mansion of the Lord Mayor for
the time being.

This being determined by the Lord Mayor, Aldermen, and Common Council,
several places were proposed, as the end of Pater noster row fronting
Cheapside, Moorfields, and Stocks market, and the latter was chosen,
from its being situated nearly in the center of the city; at a small
distance from the Royal Exchange, and in the heart of business: Stocks
market was therefore removed to Fleet ditch, and the earth dug up for
laying the foundation, when the ground was found so full of springs,
that it became necessary to erect this spacious edifice upon piles.
Meanwhile many plans and designs were drawn and examined, and that from
which this edifice was erected, had the preference.

In short, a vast number of strong piles being driven close together, the
first stone of the foundation was laid upon them, by the Right
Honourable Micajah Perry, Esq; Lord Mayor, on the 25th of October 1739,
in the presence of several of the Aldermen and Common Council, and this
great work was finished in 1753, Sir Crisp Gascoigne being the first
Lord Mayor who resided in it.

This edifice is very substantially built of Portland stone, and has a
portico of six lofty fluted columns of the Corinthian order in the
front; the same order being continued in pilasters both under the
pediment, and on each side. The basement story is very massy and built
in rustic. In the center of this story is the door which leads to the
kitchens, cellars, and other offices; and on each side rises a flight of
steps of very considerable extent, leading up to the portico, in the
middle of which is the door which leads to the apartments and offices
where business is transacted. The stone balustrade of the stairs is
continued along the front of the portico, and the columns, which are
wrought in the proportions of Palladio, support a large angular
pediment, adorned with a very noble piece in bas relief, representing
the dignity and opulence of the city of London, by Mr. Taylor.

In the center stands a very graceful woman crowned with turrets,
representing the city, her left foot placed upon the figure of Envy, who
lies on her back, and seems endeavouring to rise. Her left arm rests
upon a large shield, which has the city arms, and in her right hand she
holds a wand. This being the principal figure, is done in alto relievo:
she seems ready to step forwards, her head and right arm, which are
completely finished, project forward from the back ground, and her wand
extends beyond the cornice of the pediment. Near her, on her right side,
stands a Cupid holding the cap of Liberty over his shoulder at the end
of a short staff, in the manner of a mace; and a little farther, a river
God, representing the Thames, lies reclined, pouring a stream of water
from a large vase; and near him an anchor fastened to its cable, with
shells lying on the shore. On the left hand of London is Plenty,
kneeling and holding out her hand in a supplicating posture, as if
beseeching her to accept of the fruits she is pouring from her
cornucopia; and behind her are two naked boys with bales of goods, as
emblems of commerce.

[Illustration:

  _S. Wale delin._ _B. Green sculp._
  _The Mansion House._
]

It is, however, very obvious, that the principal figures in this
pediment are too large, which obliges London to stand, and Plenty to
kneel, in a less graceful manner than they might otherwise do; and,
besides their extraordinary size, renders them too crouded.

Beneath this portico are two series of windows, which extend along the
whole front, and above these is an Attic story with square windows
crowned with a balustrade.

The building is an oblong, and its depth is the long side; it has an
area in the middle, and the farthest end is an Egyptian hall, which is
the length of the front, very high and designed for public
entertainments. To make it regular in flank, the architect has raised a
similar building on the front, which is the upper part of a dancing
gallery. This rather hurts than adorns the face of the building.

Near the ends at each side is a window of extraordinary height, placed
between coupled Corinthian pilasters, and extending to the top of the
Attic story.

The apartments are extremely noble; but this edifice has the misfortune
to be so crouded with houses, especially on the sides, that the rooms
are dark, and even in the front there is not a sufficient area to
enlighten the building; nor can it ever be viewed to advantage, unless
in some future time the heavy load at the top should be taken off, and a
broad street, as wide as the edifice itself, opened before it into
Lothbury.


MARE _street_, Hackney.


MARGARET’S _alley_, Margaret street.


_St._ MARGARET’S HILL, extends from the court of justice, which faces
the street thus named, to the farther corner of St. George’s church.
Where this court is now kept, was anciently a church named St.
Margaret’s on the hill, which gave its name to the street. The
court-house has a small colonade that leads to a tavern, over which is
the court-room, where the Lord Mayor of London tries causes. On the
front of this edifice is the statue of King Charles II. under which is
the following inscription:

  _Combustum anno 1670, re-ædificatum annis 1685 & 1686._ Jacobo Smyth,
    _Mil. &_ Roberto Geffery, _Mil. Prætoribus. Impensis S. P. Q. L._

_St._ MARGARET’S _lane_, Old Palace yard; thus named from its situation
near St. Margaret’s church, Westminster.


_St._ MARGARET’S _Lothbury_. This church received its name from its
being dedicated to St. Margaret, a virgin saint of Antioch, who suffered
martyrdom in the reign of the Emperor Decius; and the additional
appellation of Lothbury is to point out its situation, and distinguish
it from the other churches in this city of the same name.

The old church which was built in 1440, being destroyed by the general
conflagration in 1666, the present stone edifice was erected in its
room, and completed in 1690. It stands upon the ancient course of
Wallbrook, on the north side of Lothbury, and is a plain and neat
building. It is sixty-six feet in length, fifty-four in breadth, the
height to the roof is thirty-six, and the height of the steeple 140
feet. The body is well enlightened by a row of lofty windows; over which
the wall is terminated by a balustrade; and the principal door is
ornamented with Corinthian columns which support an angular pediment.
The tower has large windows in the uppermost stage, and is terminated a
little above by a plain cornice, upon which is raised a small dome that
supports a slender spire.

A row of despicable shops was formerly built before this church; but a
few years ago they were taken down, and a neat pavement of broad stone
has been lately raised the whole length of the church, to which there is
an ascent of a few plain steps at each end, and to the principal door;
but as this pavement is in some places upwards of two feet above the
street, a regard to the safety of the passengers as well as to ornament,
ought to have induced the persons who formed this pavement to have
secured it by a neat balustrade.

The advowson of this rectory was anciently in the Abbess and Nuns of
Barking in Essex; but at the dissolution of their convent it came to the
Crown, and the church is still in his Majesty’s gift.

The Rector, besides the profits arising from casualties, &c. receives
100l. _per annum_ in lieu of tithes.


_St._ MARGARET MOSES, a church which formerly stood at the south west
corner of Little Friday street, opposite Distaff lane, and was thus
named from its being dedicated to St. Margaret abovementioned, and from
one Moses its rebuilder: but suffering by the dreadful fire of London,
and not being rebuilt, the parish has been annexed to that of St.
Mildred’s Bread street.


_St._ MARGARET _New Fish street_, stood on the east side of Fish street
hill, where the Monument is situated; but being burnt with the rest of
the buildings in London, and not rebuilt, the parish is joined to that
of St. Magnus. _Stow._


_St._ MARGARET _Pattens_, owes its additional epithet to its ancient
situation among patten-makers. This church is situated in Rood lane, at
the corner of Little Tower street, and in Billingsgate ward. The old
church, which was built in 1538, was destroyed by the fire of London,
and the present edifice raised in 1687. _Maitland._

It consists of a plain body sixty-six feet in length, fifty-two in
breadth, and the height of the roof is thirty-two feet. It is well
enlightened by a range of arched windows, with porthole windows over
them; and over the door in the front is a large Doric window, with a
cherubim’s head and a large festoon over it, above which a pediment
stretches from the steeple to the end of the church. The tower rises
square to a considerable height, and is terminated by four plain
pinacles crowned with balls, and a balustrade, within which rises a very
solid spire, terminated by a ball and fane.

This church is a rectory in the gift of the Lord Mayor, commonalty, and
citizens; and the Rector, besides glebe, casualties, &c. receives 120l.
_per annum_ in lieu of tithes.


_St._ MARGARET’S _street_, Cavendish square; so called in honour of the
Lady Oxford.


_St._ MARGARET’S _Westminster_. King Edward the Confessor having
resolved to rebuild the conventual church of St. Peter with great
magnificence, imagined that it would be a dishonour to his new and
stately edifice, to have the neighbouring people assemble in it as
usual, for the performance of religious worship, as well as prove
troublesome and inconvenient to the monks; therefore about the year
1064, he caused a church to be erected on the north side of St. Peter’s,
for the use of the neighbouring inhabitants, and dedicated it to St.
Margaret, the virgin and martyr of Antioch.

This church, which is situated only thirty feet to the north of the
abbey, was rebuilt in the reign of King Edward I. by the parishioners
and merchants of the staple, except the chancel, which was erected at
the expence of the Abbot of Westminster. At length, in the year 1735,
this church was not only beautifully repaired, but the tower cased, and
mostly rebuilt, at the expence of 3500l. granted by parliament, on
account of its being in some measure a national church, for the use of
the house of Commons. _Stow._

It is a plain, neat, and not inelegant Gothic structure, well
enlightened by a series of large windows: it has two handsome galleries
of considerable length, adorned in the front with carved work; these are
supported by slender pillars which rise to the roof, and have four small
black pillars running round each of them, adorned with gilded capitals
both at the galleries and at the top, where the flat roof is neatly
ornamented with stucco. The steeple consists of a tower, which rises to
a considerable height, and is crowned with a turret at each corner, and
a small lanthorn, much ornamented with carved work in the center, from
whence rises a flag staff.

This church in 1758, underwent a thorough repair, on the inside a new
vault was built through the whole body of the edifice, and the whole is
ornamenting with new gilding and painting. A small view of it is in the
same plate with that of Westminster ABBEY, which see.

The patronage of this church, which is a curacy, was anciently in the
Abbot and Convent of Westminster, as it is at present in the Dean and
Chapter.

On the south side of the altar is an ancient tomb, erected in the depth
of popish ignorance and superstition, on which is the portraiture of
Mary Bylling standing between the Virgin Mary and an angel, and over her
is engraved the figure of an old man, to represent the omnipresent
Deity, emitting rays of light upon the head of the Virgin, from whose
mouth proceeds a label with these words, _Ecce ancilla Domini; fiat mihi
secundum verbum tuum_. Out of Mary Bylling’s mouth issues a scroll with
these words: _Blessyd Lady, for thy glorious salutacion, bryng our
sowles to everlasting salvation_: and on two scrolls on each side of
her, _Blessyd Triniti, on me have mercy. Blessyd Triniti, on me have
mercy._ These four figures, with the several inscriptions, are engraven
on small brass plates inlaid in the stone, as is also an inscription
which gives the names of her three husbands, and lets us know that she
died on the 14th of March 1429. _Maitland._

There is also here a whimsical inscription on the tomb of Skelton, the
merry Poet Laureat to Henry VII. and VIII. who died on the 21st of June
1529.

  Come, Alecto, and lend me thy torch,
  To find a church-yard in a church-porch.
  Poverty and poetry this tomb doth inclose,
  Therefore, gentlemen, be merry in prose.

We shall conclude these odd monumental inscriptions with the following,
which as well as the former, is mentioned by Weaver in his Funeral
monuments.

  Sancta Maria, virgo virginum,
  Pray for the soul of Jone Pymichum.


MARIGOLD _alley_, Barnaby street, Southwark.*


MARIGOLD _court_, in the Strand.*


MARIGOLD _lane_, Upper Ground.*


MARIGOLD _stairs_, Upper Ground.*


MARIGOLD _street_, Rotherhith Wall.*


MARINE SOCIETY, for furnishing the navy with sea boys and landmen, in
order to increase the number of our mariners. This society was founded
soon after the breaking out of the present war, by a number of gentlemen
animated by a generous love of their country, and an ardent desire to
increase its glory, as well as from compassion for the many ragged and
miserable objects seen in our streets. This noble scheme was chiefly
conducted by a gentleman distinguished by those accomplishments which
most adorn human nature; who, besides a generous subscription, joined
his indefatigable industry in promoting this noble scheme, and even
wrote a very judicious pamphlet to shew the public advantages that would
result from it. He presented the first impression, consisting of a
thousand copies, to the society; and by his assiduity, and that of a
famous magistrate, great numbers of the lowest of the people, who would
probably have ended their days ignominiously at Tyburn, have filled the
court of France with terror, and revived the drooping glory of their
country. From this pamphlet we shall give an account of this society.

It must be observed, that every man of war, privateer, and merchant
ship, is obliged to take a certain number of boys, which are considered
both as necessary to the ship, and a nursery for seamen; thus in every
sixty gun ship of 400 men, the Captain and officers require thirty
servants.

These it was impossible to obtain at the breaking out of the war; the
society therefore sought for them among the vagrants, the pilferers, and
those whose extreme poverty and ignorance rendered them pernicious to
the community; and also endeavoured to assist the Captains and officers
in the sea service, by encouraging the industrious poor to send their
children to sea; and by inviting all who were fit for the sea service to
enter into it: stout lads who were covered with nastiness and had no
means of support, were cleaned, well fed, and provided with lodgings;
and if any of the men or boys were distempered, as sometimes happened,
by mere wretchedness, filth, hunger, or the use of bad food, they were
properly physicked and put in a condition to go on board; while those
who were more happy in having friends to provide for them, were
appointed to come to the office, where they were to be cloathed, and all
were fitted with cloathing and bedding by the society, and sent clean,
as well as properly dressed, on board his Majesty’s ships.

Of these boys they took some of thirteen years of age; but chiefly
invited stout lads of sixteen and upwards, because they would soon
become able seamen; and now they take none who are less than four feet
four inches in height.

The greatest care imaginable is taken not to give any master, mistress,
or parent, the least reason to complain. These have been always invited
to see the boys when they are cloathed, on Thursday mornings at Mr.
Fielding’s house; and again when they are examined and sent to their
respective ships by the society, at the Seamens office over the Royal
Exchange; and if any apprentice or son is required by his master or
parents, he is delivered up immediately.

As to the landmen, they are required to be hardy, active, and robust;
these, to prevent their being despised by the sailors, are immediately
cloathed as seamen, and so divided among the messes of the mariners, as
will soonest enable them to learn their language and duty, and they are
completely fitted out without being obliged to expend any part of the
bounty of thirty shillings, granted by his Majesty to all the landmen
who enter into the service.

What gives the higher idea of this society, is, that several of its
members are active, and particularly Mr. Fielding, in collecting many of
the boys who are in the most abject condition: they assist and relieve
each other in a task by which they are to gain nothing, but the applause
of their own hearts.

To prevent imposition, the society keeps a sample of the cloathing at
their office, which is sealed with the seals of several of the
committee, and shewn to the men and boys when they are cloathed, that
the society may be sure the slopseller keeps up to his engagement.
Besides, as it is the steady purpose of the society to preserve the
health of the men and boys whom they clothe, as far as it depends on
such raiment, they are not contented with such manufactures as they find
in the shops, but buy them of the manufacturer in Yorkshire, which being
well wetted and milled on the spot, make what is called pea jackets,
that last twice as long, and resist the weather four times as much as
the common sort of pea jackets. And as they think the severity of the
winter season renders common thin flannel waistcoats insufficient, they
make waistcoats of white or other coloured kerseys, that are of the
greatest service and duration. The breeches or drawers for the men and
boys are made of half thicks or thin kerseys, which the society also
provides from Yorkshire. In order also to make the most of the money,
and provide the best things, these jackets, waistcoats, and breeches are
brown instead of blue, the former being found the most durable colour;
and such jackets cost ten _per cent._ less than blue, on account of the
excessive price of indigo.

The cloathing and bedding given each of the boys, are a felt hat, a
worsted cap, a kersey pea jacket, a kersey pair of breeches, a striped
flannel or kersey waistcoat, a pair of trowsers, two pair of hose, two
pair of shoes, two handkerchiefs, three shirts; a bed, pillow, blanket,
and coverlet; a pair of buckles and buttons; thread, worsted, and
needles; a knife, a Prayer Book and Testament to those whose Captains
desire them, and a bag to put their cloaths in.

The cloathing given each of the men is, a felt seaman’s hat, a kersey
pea jacket, a waistcoat and drawers of the same, a pair of drab
breeches, a pair of thin trowsers, a pair of worsted hose, a pair of
yarn hose, two shirts, two worsted caps, one pair of shoes, one pair of
buckles, one pair of buttons, a knife, thread, worsted, and needles,
with a bag for their cloaths.

A note of these cloaths is given to every man and boy, by which he may
see what he has, but nothing is delivered till they are actually on
board the tender in the river Thames, or in their respective ships at
the ports; except to the boys, who are attended to the ships.

Our author, who was one of the committee, observes, that from this
society may be seen the great business that may be done for a trifling
expence; for the Treasurer, Commissioners, Secretary, and Clerks; the
house-rent and entertainments; the fire and candle, paper, pens and ink,
do not all together cost the society an hundred pounds _per annum_; and
if, by an additional Clerk, he adds, it should happen to swell to 150l.
“greater good with less money, I will be bold to say, is not done by any
society in this kingdom: for exclusive of the charge of cloathing,
feeding, and sending boys to Portsmouth, the expence is very little more
than the rent of two rooms at about 25l. _per annum_, the salary of a
secretary, not exceeding 50l. _per annum_, and a Porter 10l. _per
annum_.”

There is a general meeting every three months, viz. the first Thursday
in January, the first in April, the first in July, and the first in
October, or oftener, if the committee desire it; when an account of
receipts and disbursements are laid before the subscribers under the
direction of the committee, which consists of a considerable number of
them. Of this committee not less than three persons act, who meet every
Thursday at eleven o’clock at the Merchants Seamens office over the
Royal Exchange; and any other day, if necessary, at the Secretary’s
house in Prince’s street, where any two of the committee may transact
the business when it is very urgent.


MARINERS _alley_, Fore street, Lambeth.


MARINERS _street_, Shadwell.


MARK _lane_, extends from Fenchurch street to Tower street, and is
chiefly inhabited by merchants. Maitland says it was originally called
Mart lane, it being once used as a public mart. On the east side of this
lane is the Corn Exchange.


MARKET _court_, 1. By Oxford market. 2. By Shepherd’s market.


MARKET _hill_, Upper Shadwell.


MARKET _lane_, Pallmall.


MARKET _passage_, 1. Lime street, leading into Leadenhall market. 2.
Oxford street, leading into Oxford market. 3. Paternoster row, leading
into Newgate market.


MARKET _street_, 1. Jermain street. 2. Newport street. 3. Millbank,
Westminster.


MARKETS. As one of the principal advantages of a city are commodious
markets, this metropolis may, in this particular, be said to exceed
most, if not all the cities in Europe: some account of these is
dispersed through this work; notwithstanding which, it may be proper,
under this article, to gratify the reader’s curiosity, by giving a list
of them, that the whole may be seen at one view.

  Bear Key, the great corn market.

  Billingsgate, the great fish, and coal market.

  Bishopsgate street market, for hay.

  Blackwell hall, the great cloth market.

  Bloomsbury market, for meat, &c.

  Borough market, a new market for meat and greens.

  Brook’s market, for meat.

  Carnaby market, for meat, &c.

  Clare market, for meat, &c.

  Covent Garden market, for herbs and fruit.

  Fleet market, for meat, fruit, herbs, &c.

  Hay market, Pallmall, for hay and straw.

  Honey lane market, for meat, &c.

  Hoxton market, for meat, &c.

  Hungerford market, for meat, &c.

  Leadenhall market, for leather, hides, and all kinds of provisions.

  Mark lane market, for corn.

  Newgate market, for all kinds of provisions.

  Newport market, for meat, &c.

  Oxford market, for meat, &c.

  Queenhithe, the great meal market.

  Red Lion market, for meat, &c.

  St. James’s market, for meat, &c.

  St. Margaret’s Hill market, for hay and straw.

  Shadwell market, for meat, &c.

  Smithfield market, for cattle.

  Spitalfields market, for meat, greens, &c.

  Westminster market, for meat, &c.

  Whitechapel market, for meat by wholesale and retail.

  White Horse Inn meal market, near Holborn bridge.

  Wood’s Close market, for sheep skins.

[Illustration:

  _S. Wale delin._ _C. Grignion sculp._
  _Marlborough House._
]


MARLBOROUGH HOUSE, situated behind the houses on the west side of
Pallmall, is a very large brick edifice, ornamented with stone, and
built in a peculiar taste. The front, which is very extensive, has only
two series of windows, and on each side the wings are ornamented at the
corners, with a kind of stone rustic, and the edifice is terminated by a
balustrade, in the manner it appears in the print. On the sides of the
area next the wings a small colonade extends on each side, and the side
opposite to the abovementioned area is taken up with the offices. The
late Duchess of Marlborough, when this structure was finished, intended
to have opened a way to it from Pallmall, directly in the front, as is
evident from the manner in which the court yard is finished; but Sir
Robert Walpole having purchased the house before it, and being upon no
good terms with the Duchess, she was prevented in her design. The front
towards the Park resembles this, only instead of the two middle windows
in the wings, there are niches for statues, and instead of the area in
front, you descend by a flight of steps into the garden.

This structure is, however, greatly censured by the critics in
architecture.

The apartments however are noble, and well disposed, and the furniture
is rich. In the vestibule at the entrance, is painted the battle of
Hochstet, in which the most remarkable scene is the taking Marshal
Tallard, the French General, and several other officers of great
distinction, prisoners. The figures of the great Duke of Marlborough, of
Prince Eugene of Savoy, and General Cadogan, are finely executed.


MARLBOROUGH _court_, 1. Berwick street. 2. Petticoat lane.


MARLBOROUGH, or _Carnaby market_, by Marlborough street. See CARNABY
MARKET.


MARLBOROUGH _mews_, by Oxford street; so called from the Dukes of
Marlborough formerly keeping their hawks there.


MARLBOROUGH _row_, Carnaby or Marlborough market.


MARLBOROUGH _street_, a very handsome street, extending from the end of
Argyle buildings.


MARSH _street_, Ratcliff highway.†


MARSH _yard_, Wapping.†


_Earl_ MARSHAL _of England_, the eighth great officer of the kingdom,
hereditary in the family of the Dukes of Norfolk ever since the year
1553. This officer had formerly great authority; for he took cognizance
of all matters of war and arms, determined contracts relating to deeds
of arms out of the realm upon land, and matters concerning wars within
the realm, that could not be determined by common law, in which he was
generally guided by the civil law. Indeed he had several courts, among
which was the Marshalsea court in the Borough, so called from its being
under his jurisdiction. But the house of Norfolk being of the Romish
religion, is incapable by law of performing these offices. See
MARSHALSEA PRISON. The Earl Marshal has however held several courts at
Doctors Commons, to inquire into the right several people had assumed of
bearing arms. _Chamberlain’s Present State._


_City_ MARSHAL, an officer of considerable authority, dignity, and
profit. His business is to see the laws of the city put in execution;
and in solemn processions he rides before the Lord Mayor, on a horse
richly caparisoned. The sum of fifteen hundred pounds is usually given
for this place.


MARSHAL _street_, 1. Maiden lane, Deadman’s place. 2. Silver street,
Bloomsbury.


MARSHALSEA COURT. See the following article.


MARSHALSEA PRISON, on St. Margaret’s Hill, Southwark, is a place of
confinement for persons who have committed crimes at sea, as pirates,
&c. and for debtors. In this prison is the Marshalsea court, the Judges
of which are, the Lord Steward of his Majesty’s houshold for the time
being; the Steward of the court, who must be a barrister at law; and a
Deputy Steward. In all civil actions tried in this court, both the
plaintiff and defendant must belong to his Majesty’s houshold, The
persons confined in this prison for crimes at sea, take their trials at
the Old Bailey.

In the same prison is the _Palace Court_, the jurisdiction of which
extends twelve miles round the palace of Westminster, the city of London
only excepted; and the debtors within any part of Westminster, and
twelve miles round, may be carried to this prison for a debt of 40s.
Actions for debt are tried in this court every Friday, and there are the
same Judges, Counsellors and Attorneys here as in the Marshalsea court;
these are, besides the Judges already mentioned, a Prothonotary, a
Secondary, and Deputy Prothonotary; four Counsellors, and six Attorneys,
But in this court neither the plaintiff nor defendant must belong to his
Majesty’s houshold.

The buildings are mean and ruinous; but the court-room is pretty
spacious and convenient.


MARSHAM _court_, Hog lane, St. Giles’s.†


MARSHAM _street_, Market street, Westminster.†


MARTIN’S _court_, 1. Whitechapel.† 2. Chick lane, Smithfield.†


_St._ MARTIN’S _in the Fields_, in St. Martin’s lane, near Charing
Cross. This church received its name from St. Martin, an Hungarian, who
was sainted for the cruelty with which he persecuted the Arians, and its
being formerly situated in the fields. Though the present structure is
of a modern date, there was very early a church upon the same spot,
dedicated to the same saint; for there are authentic records of a
dispute in 1222, between the Abbot of Westminster and the Bishop of
London, concerning the exemption of the church of St. Martin’s in the
Fields from the jurisdiction of the Bishop of London, How long before
this a building for the service of religion was erected there, is not
easy to determine; but it was probably a chapel for the monks of
Westminster, when they visited their convent garden, which then extended
to it. However, the endowments of this church sell with the monks who
possessed it, and in Henry the VIIIth’s reign a small church was built
there at the King’s expence, the inhabitants being then too poor to pay
for it; but this structure not being capacious enough to accommodate the
parishioners, it was greatly enlarged in 1607. At length, after many
expensive repairs, that structure was taken down in the year 1721, and
soon after the first stone of the present edifice was laid. Five years
completed the building, and in 1726 it was consecrated.

It is observable, that on the laying of the first stone, his Majesty
King George I. gave an hundred guineas to be distributed among the
workmen, and some time after 1500l. to purchase an organ. The whole
expence of building and decorating this church, amounted to 36,891l.
10s. 4d. of which 33,450l. was granted by Parliament, and the rest
raised by the above royal benefaction, a subscription, and the sale of
seats in the church.

St. Martin’s in the Fields is an elegant edifice built with stone. In
the west front is an ascent by a very long flight of steps to a very
noble portico of Corinthian columns, which support a pediment in which
is the royal arms in has relief. The same order is continued round in
pilasters, and in the intercolumniations are two series of windows
surrounded with rustic. On each side the doors, on the sides which are
near the corners, are lofty Corinthian columns; the roof is concealed by
a handsome balustrade, and the spire is stately and elegant.

The decorations on the inside are extremely fine; the roof is richly
adorned with fret-work; slender Corinthian columns raised on high
pedestals, rising in the front of the galleries, serve to support both
them and the roof, which on the sides rests upon them in a very
ornamental arch-work. The east end is richly adorned with fret-work and
gilding, and over the altar is a large window finely painted.

This church was repaired and beautified in 1758.

With respect to this noble edifice, says the author of the _Review_, “I
could wish that a view was opened from the Mews to St. Martin’s church;
I don’t know any of the modern buildings about town which better
deserves such an advantage. The portico is at once elegant and august,
and if the steps arising from the street to the front could have been
made regular, and on a line from end to end, it would have given it a
very considerable grace; but as the situation of the ground would not
allow it, this is to be esteemed a misfortune rather than a fault. The
round columns at each angle of the church are very well contrived, and
have a very fine effect in the profile of the building; the east end is
remarkably elegant, and very justly challenges a particular applause. In
short, if there is any thing wanting in this fabric, ’tis a little more
elevation, which, I presume, is apparently wanted within, and would
create an additional beauty without. I can’t help thinking too that, in
complaisance to the galleries, the architect has reversed the order of
the windows, it being always usual to have the large ones nearer the
eye, and the small, by way of Attic story, on the top.”

This church is a vicarage, in the gift of the Bishop of London.


_St._ MARTIN’S _Church yard_, St. Martin’s lane, Charing Cross.


_St._ MARTIN’S _court_, a large, handsome court, with a free stone
pavement in St. Martin’s lane, Charing Cross.


_St._ MARTIN’S IRONMONGER LANE, a church which stood at the corner of
Church alley, in Ironmonger lane, and in Cheap ward; but being destroyed
by the dreadful fire of London, and not rebuilt, the parish was united
to St. Olave Jewry. _Newc. Rep. Eccles._


_St._ MARTIN’S _lane_, 1. Opposite Northumberland house in the Strand;
thus named from the church of St. Martin’s in the Fields. 2. Canon
street, Walbrook; so named from the church of St. Martin’s Orgar, which
was formerly on the east side of it.


_St._ MARTIN’S LE GRAND, extends from the corner of Blowbladder street
to Aldersgate. This street, as far as Bell court near St. Anne’s lane,
as well as all the courts on each side, is within its own liberty, and
in the government of Westminster. It took its name from a collegiate
church founded here by one Ingalricus and his brother Edward, in the
year 1056, for a Dean, secular Canons, and Priests, and dedicated to St.
Martin. Afterwards the addition of _le Grand_ was added, from the
extraordinary privileges of sanctuary granted to it by several Monarchs.
Hither thieves, ruffians, and murderers used to fly for safety; here
robbers brought their stolen goods, which they shared among themselves,
or sold to the inhabitants: here also lived the makers of picklocks; the
counterfeiters of keys and seals; the forgers of false evidence; those
who made chains, beads, and plate of gilt copper, which they sold for
gold; and, in short, gamesters, bawds, and strumpets. To so great a
height of licentiousness was this sanctuary grown, that in the reign of
Henry VII. the Sheriffs of London venturing to take from thence by
violence a person who had taken sanctuary there, the Abbot of
Westminster exhibited a bill to the King against them, upon which the
cause was heard in the Star-chamber, and the Sheriff severely fined.
_Maitland._

Though this place is in a manner in the heart of the city, it is still
in the liberty of Westminster; and the inhabitants are governed, and
vote accordingly. The courts and alleys are now chiefly inhabited by
taylors and others who are not free of the city; for all foreigners
carry on their trades, and professions there without molestation.


_St._ MARTIN’S LE GRAND COURT. As St. Martin’s le Grand is a liberty
distinct from the government of London, and subject to the Deanery of
Westminster, it has a court of record kept every Wednesday, for the
trial of all personal actions of what nature soever, and there is a
court-house and a prison.

In this court the leading process is a _capias_ against the body, or an
attachment against the goods; so that a man’s goods may be seized in his
own house, upon the first process, if he himself be not taken: which is
according to the practice of all ancient liberties or franchises.
_Stow._


_St._ MARTIN’S _Ludgate_, on the north side of Ludgate street, almost
contiguous to the gate, and in the ward of Faringdon within. The old
church being consumed by the fire of London, the present edifice was
erected in its place. The body is not seen from the street; but is
tolerably enlightened. The steeple consists of a plain tower, and a
pretty lofty spire raised on a substantial arcade, so that it has at
once the appearance of strength and lightness.

The patronage of this rectory was anciently in the Abbot and Convent of
Westminster; but on the suppression of their monastery, King Henry VIII.
erected Westminster into a bishopric, and gave the advowson of this
church to the Bishop; but the new see being dissolved by Edward VI.
Queen Mary granted it to the Bishop of London, and his successors, in
whom it still remains.

The Rector receives, by act of Parliament, in lieu of tithes, 160l. _per
annum_. _Newcomb’s Eccles. Rep._

Mr. Strype, in his edition of Stowe’s Survey, gives several monumental
inscriptions in this church, from which we shall select the two
following; the first to the memory of William Yeardley and his wife, the
former of whom died on the 28th of October 1523, and the latter on the
20th of July 1533.

  William Yeardley, and Elizabeth his wife,
  Who lived on earth free from strife,
  Not farre from this, in earth doth lye,
  To shew that all that live must dye.
  Where they do quietly expect
  To rise again as God’s elect.
  They left four daughters and a sonne,
  Who left them this when they were gone.

The other is on Florens Caldwell, Esq; citizen and haberdasher, and Mary
his wife, the latter of whom died June 19, 1590.

  Earth goes to earth, as mold to mold,
  Earth treads on earth, glittering in gold,
  Earth as to earth returne neare should,
  Earth shall to earth goe ere he would,
  Earth upon earth consider may,
  Earth goes to earth naked away.
  Earth, though on earth be stout and gay,
  Shall from earth pass poore away.
    Be merciful and charitable,
    Relieve the poor as thou art able;
    A shrowd to thy grave
    Is all thou shalt have.


_St._ MARTIN’S ORGARS, a rectory, the church of which was situated on
the east side of St. Martin’s lane near Canon street, in Candlewick
ward, and is so named from its dedication to St. Martin; and the
additional epithet of _Orgars_, from Odgarus or Ordgarus, who was
probably its founder or patron: but this church being destroyed with the
rest of the public edifices in the fire of London in 1666, and not
rebuilt, the parish was annexed to the church of St. Clement Eastcheap.
_Newc. Rep. Eccles. Paroch._

In this church was a tomb with the following epitaph, mentioned by Mr.
Strype in his edition of Stowe’s Survey, on Sir Allen Cotton, Knt.
Alderman, and sometime Lord Mayor of London, who died on the 24th of
September 1628, leaving three sons and two daughters; and these sons
caused his monument to be erected,

  When he left earth, rich bounty dy’d,
  Mild courtesie gave place to pride:
  Soft Mercie to bright Justice said,
  O sister! we are both betray’d;
  White Innocence lay on the ground
  By Truth, and wept at either’s wound.
  The sons of Levi did lament,
  Their lamps went out, their oil was spent.
  Heav’n hath his soul, and only we
  Spin out our lives in misery.
  So, Death, thou missest of thy ends,
  And kill’st not him, but kill’st his friends.


_St._ MARTIN’S OUTWICH, at the south east angle of Threadneedle street,
in Broad street ward, owes its additional epithet to William and John de
Oteswich, who were some time the proprietors thereof. The patronage of
this church was indeed anciently in the family of the Earls of Surry;
but afterwards coming to the de Oteswiches, they conferred it upon the
company of Merchant Taylors, in whom it still remains. The Rector
receives only 40l. a year in tithes. _Maitland._

This is one of those few churches that escaped the fire in 1666, and
with some repairs has stood ever since, and may stand much longer,
though it is already above 220 years old.

This edifice is an old Gothic structure of the meaner style; it is
sixty-six feet long, and forty-two broad; the height of the roof is
thirty-one feet, and the height of the steeple, sixty-five feet. The
body is of brick, strengthened at the corners by a massy rustic: the
windows, which are large, are of the coarse Gothic kind, and the top is
surrounded with plain square battlements. From the tower, which is
extremely plain and simple, rises a turret, that is open, arched, and
supported by four piers; and from the dome rises a ball and fane.

The New View of London has the following epitaph in this church.

          In memory of John Wright, _anno sal._ 1633, aged 24.

  Reader, thou may’st forbear to put thine eyes
  To charge for tears, to mourn these obsequies;
  Such charitable drops would best be given
  To those who late, or never come to heav’n.
  But here you would, by weeping on this dust,
  Allay his happiness with thy mistrust;
  Whose pious closing of his youthful years
  Deserves thy imitation, not thy tears.


_St._ MARTIN’S POMARY, or Ironmonger lane, Cheapside, is supposed by Mr.
Stowe to have derived its additional epithet of _Pomary_, from apple
trees growing about it; which is the more probable, as in his time there
were large void spaces near it. This church stood at the corner of
Ironmonger lane, and in Cheap ward; but suffering by the dreadful fire
of London, the parish was united to the church of St. Olave’s Jewry.


MARTIN’S _rents_, Queen street, New Gravel lane.†


MARTIN’S _street_, Thames street.


_St._ MARTIN’S VINTRY, stood in Thames street, near the south east
corner of Queen street, and in Vintry ward. This church, which was a
rectory, received its additional denomination from its being situated
among the wine tunners, wine merchants, and coopers: but sharing the
common fate in the dreadful catastrophe of 1666, and not being rebuilt,
the parish was united to that of St. Michael’s Royal, and 120l. a year
was settled upon the Rector in lieu of tithes. _Maitland._


MARTLET’S _court_, Bow street, Covent Garden.†


_St._ MARY ABCHURCH, in Abchurch lane, Candlewick ward, owes its name to
its dedication to the Virgin Mary, and the additional appellation of
_Ab_ or _Upchurch_, was given it on account of its elevation in
comparison of the neighbouring ground towards the Thames, and to
distinguish it from the many other churches of the same name in this
city. A church dedicated to St. Mary has stood here from very early
times; and we find that in the year 1448, it was in the patronage of the
Prior and Canons of St. Mary Overy’s; but devolving to the crown in the
reign of Queen Elizabeth, her Majesty granted the perpetual advowson to
_Corpus Christi_ college in Cambridge, wherein it still remains, though
in ecclesiastical affairs, it is subject to the Archdeacon. _Maitland._

The old church stood till it was consumed by the fire in 1666, after
which the present structure was raised in its room in the year 1686.

The building is of brick, strengthened by rustic quoins of stone at the
corners, with three windows on each side, of which the middle one is the
principal, that rising higher, and taking up the space above, while the
others, which are smaller, have round windows over them; these have all
stone cases. The tower rises square with the corners strengthened with
rustic; and a large window in the center of each face, ornamented like
the rest. From this tower rises a kind of dome, and upon its summit
stands a plain spire supported by a lanthorn base.


_St._ MARY ALDERMANBURY, by the north east corner of Love lane, has a
fine situation, with a large area, besides the church yard in the front.
A church of the same name appears from ancient records to have been
situated there so early as about the year 1300; however, great part of
the old structure was taken down in 1633, and rebuilt at a considerable
expence; but thirty three years afterwards it was destroyed by the fire
of London, and ten years after that dreadful event, it was finished in
the present form.

It is a plain stone building, likely to stand for ages; the body is well
enlightened by a range of large well-proportioned windows, and the
corners are wrought with rustic: it is 72 feet long, and 45 broad; the
roof is 38 feet high, and the steeple about 90 feet. It has a plain
solid tower, constructed in the same manner as the body of the church;
and the angles in the upper stage are adorned with rustic: the cornice
is supported by scrolls, and above it is a plain Attic course: in this
rises a turret with a square base that supports the dial; this turret is
arched, but the corners are massy: its roof is terminated in a point on
which is placed the fane.

The patronage of this church appears to have been anciently in the Dean
and Chapter of St. Paul’s; but the parishioners have ever since the
reformation had the right of chusing their own Minister, who must
however be licenced by the Bishop of London; but in matters
ecclesiastical it is subject to the Archdeacon, except as to wills and
administrations, which belong to the Commissary. The Incumbent receives
by act of Parliament 150l. a year from the parish.


_St._ MARY ALDERMARY, on the east side of Bow lane, in Cordwainer street
ward, has its additional epithet of Aldermary, or Elder Mary, from its
being the most ancient church in this city dedicated to the Virgin Mary.
The last church, which was erected at the expence of Henry Keeble, was
destroyed by the fire of London in 1666; but it was afterwards erected
at the expence of Henry Rogers, Esq; who generously gave 5000l. towards
rebuilding it.

This Gothic edifice is very spacious, it being an hundred feet in length
and sixty-three in breadth; the height of the roof is forty-five feet,
and that of the steeple an hundred and thirty-five. The body is
enlightened by a single series of large Gothic windows. The wall has
well-contrived buttresses and battlements; these buttresses run up
pilaster fashion, in two stages, not projecting in the old manner from
the body of the building. The tower, which is full of ornament, consists
of five stages, each of which, except the lowest, has one Gothic window;
and the pinacles, which are properly so many turrets, are continued at
each corner down to the ground, divided into stages as the body of the
tower, and cabled with small pillars bound round it, with a kind of
arched work, and subdivisions between. _English Architecture._

This rectory is one of the thirteen peculiars belonging to the
Archbishop of Canterbury; and the parish of St. Thomas Apostles being
annexed to this church by an act of Parliament granted in the reign of
King Charles II. the profits of the Rector are greatly augmented, he
receiving 150l. _per annum_ in lieu of tithes, and about 100l. a year by
glebe.


_St._ MARY AT HILL, on the west side of St. Mary Hill, in Billingsgate
ward, owes its additional epithet to its situation on an eminence. This
church is of considerable antiquity, since a chantry was founded in it
so early as about the year 1336.

It is remarkable, that in the year 1497, digging in this church for the
foundation of a wall, the corpse of Alice Hackney, who died about the
year 1322, was discovered in a very rotten coffin; and that the skin was
sound and flexible, and the joints pliable, though buried about 175
years. The body was kept above ground three or four days, without any
noisome smell, but then beginning to be tainted was again laid in the
ground.

Though this church was not destroyed by the fire of London, every thing
combustible in it was consumed; it was however soon after repaired, and
the parish of St. Andrew Hubbard annexed to it. It is a
well-proportioned Gothic structure, consisting of a plain body
enlightened by large windows, and a tower crowned by a pretty handsome
turret.

The advowson of this church appears to have been in private hands, till
about the year 1638, when it was purchased by the parish; but since the
parish of St. Andrew Hubbard was united to it, the Duke of Somerset, who
is patron thereof, presents in his turn. The Rector receives 200l. a
year in lieu of tithes, and about 24l. _per annum_ by glebe.


_St._ MARY AX, a street on the north side of Leadenhall street. Here was
anciently a church dedicated not only to the Virgin Mary, but to St.
Ursula and her eleven thousand virgins; but it was commonly called _St.
Mary at the Ax_, from the sign of the _Ax_ over against the east end of
the church; and sometimes it was named St. Mary Papillar, from a plat of
ground belonging to the Skinners company, that lay on the north side of
it; but this parish being, about the year 1565, united to the parish
church of St. Andrew Undershaft, St. Mary at the Ax was let out as a
warehouse to a merchant; but the street however in which this edifice
stood, still retains its name. _Maitland._


MARYBON. See _St._ MARY LA BONNE.


MARYBON _Fields_, the fields between London and Marybon, or St. Mary la
Bonne.


MARYBON _lane_, Tyburn road.


MARYBON _passage_, Oxford street.


MARYBON _place_, Little Castle street.


MARYBON _road_, Oxford street.


MARYBON _street_, near Warwick street, Marybon.


_St._ MARY BOTHAW, stood on the east side of Turnwheel lane near Dowgate
hill, and took its additional name, according to the surmise of Mr.
Stowe, from its vicinity to a _Boat haw_, or boat-builder’s yard in that
neighbourhood. This church, which was one of the thirteen peculiars
belonging to the Archbishop of Canterbury, having suffered greatly by
the fire of London, and not being rebuilt, the parish was annexed to
that of St. Swithin.


MARY CLARKE’S _yard_, Gravel lane.†


_St._ MARY COLECHURCH, stood in the Poultry, at the south west corner of
the Old Jewry, in Cheap ward, and owed its additional epithet of
Colechurch, to one Cole, its founder: but suffering the fate of most of
the other public buildings in 1666, and not being rebuilt, the parish
was united to the neighbouring church of St. Mildred. _Stow._


_St._ MARY OF GRACE, an abbey of Cistertian monks, founded in the reign
of Edward III. on Tower hill, where the victualling office is now
situated.


MARY GRAY’S _yard_, Gravel lane.†


_St._ MARY LA BONNE, thus called from its being supposed to signify _St.
Mary the Good_; though its original name, according to Maitland, was
Maryborne. This gentleman gives the following account of the rise of
this village, which is now almost united to this great metropolis: the
village of Tyborne going to decay, and its church, named St. John the
Evangelist, left alone by the side of the highway, it was robbed of its
books, vestments, bells, images, and other decorations; on which the
parishioners petitioned the Bishop of London for leave to take down
their old, and erect a new church elsewhere, which being readily granted
in the year 1400, they erected a new church where they had some time
before built a chapel, and that structure being dedicated to the Virgin
Mary, received the additional epithet of Borne, from its vicinity to the
neighbouring brook or bourn.

This village, if it may be still called by that name, is almost joined
by new buildings to this metropolis; and the new buildings this way are
now increasing so very fast, that it will undoubtedly in a very short
time be quite joined, and become a part of it. The old church, which was
a mean edifice, was pulled down, and a one erected in 1741. This
structure is built with brick in as plain a manner as possible. It has
two series of small arched windows on each side, and the only ornaments
are a vase at each corner, and a turret at the west end. There are here
also a French meeting-house, a charity school, and a place of public
entertainment, which has a pleasant garden, and a band of vocal and
instrumental music. This may be considered as a kind of humble imitation
of Vauxhall.


_St._ MARY LE BOW, near the corner of Bow lane in Cheapside, received
the epithet _le Bow_, from its being the first church in this city built
with arches: for so early as in the time of William the Conqueror a
church of the same name stood in this place; a massy Gothic pile,
decorated with lofty arches, which the vulgar of that time called bows,
and this name has been continued through all its succeeding changes.
Here the court of Arches used to meet, and from these arches received
its name. _Stowe._

In the history of the ancient edifice we find, that in the year 1271, a
great number of people were destroyed, and many more maimed by the
falling of the steeple, after which it remained without one till the
year 1512, when it was finished upon the old plan, with stone brought
from Caen in Normandy; and thus continued till it was destroyed with the
other buildings in the city, by the fire in 1666.

The present edifice, which was built by the great Sir Christopher Wren,
was finished in 1673, and is a handsome structure, chiefly admired for
the elegance of its steeple, which is extremely light in its aspect, and
though very high and full of openings, is secure from any second fall by
the geometrical proportion and lightness of its several parts. It is
thought to be the most beautiful thing of its kind in Europe.

The tower is square from the ground, and in this form rises to a
considerable height; but with more ornament as it advances. The
principal decoration of the lower part is the entrance, which is a
lofty, noble, and well-proportioned arch, on two of the sides faced with
a bold rustic, and raised on a plain solid course from the foundation.
Within the arch is a portal of the Doric order; the freeze ornamented
with trigliphs, and with sculpture in the metopes; over this arch is an
opening with a small balcony, which answers to a window on the other
face. The first stage is terminated by an elegant cornice, over which
again rises a plain course, where a dial projects into Cheapside. Above
this is in each face, large arched windows, with coupled Ionic pilasters
at the sides, near the corners. The cornice over these windows supports
an elegant balustrade, with Attic pillars over the Ionic columns,
supporting turrets, each composed of four handsome scrolls, which join
at the top, where are placed urns with flames.

From this part, the steeple rises circular. There is a plain course to
the height of half the scrolls, and upon this are raised a circular
range of Corinthian columns, while the body of the steeple is continued
round and plain within them. These support a second balustrade, with
very large scrolls extending from it to the body of the steeple. Above
these is placed a series of Composite columns, and from the entablature
rises another set of scrolls, supporting the spire which rests upon four
balls, and is terminated by a globe, whence rises a fane in the form of
a dragon. The view here given will help to illustrate this description.

[Illustration:

  _S. Wale delin._ _J. Green sc. Oxon._
  _Bow Steeple._
]

The author of the Critical Review of the public Buildings, says, “The
steeple of Bow church is a master-piece in a peculiar kind of building,
which has no fixed rules to direct it, nor is it to be reduced to any
settled laws of beauty: without doubt if we consider it only as a part
of some other building, it can be esteemed no other than a delightful
absurdity: but if either considered in itself, or as a decoration of a
whole city in prospect, it is not only to be justified, but admired.
That which we have now mentioned is beyond question as perfect as human
imagination can contrive or execute; and till we see it outdone, we
shall hardly, think it to be equalled.”

This church is a rectory, and the chief of the thirteen peculiars in
this city belonging to the Archbishop of Canterbury. To it are united
the parishes of Alhallows Honey lane, and St. Pancras, by which the
Incumbent’s profits are much increased; he receiving, besides glebe,
casualties, and three parsonage houses, 200l. _per annum_, in lieu of
tithes.


_St._ MARY LE STRAND, so called from its being situated in the middle of
the Strand. The old church belonging to this parish is mentioned so
early as the year 1222, when it was named _St. Mary and the Innocents of
the Strand_; but how long it stood before that time is uncertain. It was
then situated in a pleasant church yard on the south side of the Strand,
where the east end of Somerset house is placed; and for the erecting of
this last edifice it was taken down in 1549, by order of Edward Seymour,
Duke of Somerset, Prime Minister to Edward VI. which depriving the
parishioners of a place of worship, they joined themselves to the church
of St. Clement’s Danes, and afterwards to that of St. John Baptist in
the Savoy, where they continued till the year 1723. At length, the act
having passed for erecting the fifty new churches within the bills of
mortality, one was appointed for this parish, and the first stone laid
on the 25th of February 1714; it was finished in three years and a half,
though it was not consecrated till the 1st of January 1723, when,
instead of its ancient name, it was called St. Mary le Strand. It was
the first finished of any of the fifty new churches.

This is a very superb, though not a very extensive edifice; massy,
without the appearance of being heavy, and formed to stand for ages. At
the entrance on the west end is an ascent by a flight of steps cut in
the sweep of a circle. These lead to a circular portico of Ionic columns
covered with a dome, which is crowned with an elegant vase. These
columns are continued along the body of the church, with pilasters of
the same order at the corners, and in the intercolumniations are niches
handsomely ornamented. Over the dome is a pediment supported by
Corinthian columns, which are also continued round the body of the
structure; over those of the Ionic order beneath; between these are the
windows placed over the niches. These columns are supported on
pedestals, and have pilasters behind with arches sprung from them, and
the windows have angular and circular pediments alternately. In short, a
handsome balustrade is carried round the top, and its summit is adorned
with vases. The steeple is light though solid, and ornamented with
Composite columns and capitals.

This structure, in the opinion of some, will shew late posterity, that
the period when it was built afforded architects who might have done
honour to Italy; while others condemn it, as little more than a cluster
of ornaments without a proper plan or model to be adorned.

We shall not here decide which of these opinions is most judicious; but
shall leave it to the decision of each person’s judgment who examines
the edifice itself: we cannot however help observing, that the situation
of the west front is as happy as can be wished for being viewed at a
distance; and yet it has not this advantage in perfection, a watch house
being erected in the middle of the street directly before it, which in a
great measure spoils the prospect, and prevents its terminating the
vista so agreeably as it otherwise would.

This church is a rectory in the gift of the Bishop of Worcester; the
value of the living is 225l. _per annum_, besides surplice fees; of this
sum one hundred pounds has been given and settled by Parliament, and an
hundred and twenty-five pounds is raised by the inhabitants by a rate of
four pence in the pound, in lieu of tithes. _Newc. Rep. Eccles. Paroch._

_St._ MARY MAGDALEN’S BERMONDSEY, near the south west corner of
Bermondsey street, which we vulgarly call Barnaby street, in Southwark.
It is dedicated to Mary Magdalen the sister of Lazarus, who was
celebrated for her beauty, and still more for her piety. It appears from
the _Conqueror’s Survey_, that a church of the same name was situated in
this place so early as the time of the Saxons.

The present edifice, which was built in 1680, is seventy-six feet in
length, and sixty-one in breadth; the height to the roof is thirty feet,
and the height of the steeple eighty-seven feet. It is a plain structure
enlightened by a single series of arched windows with cherubs heads on
the top. The walls are of brick plaistered over, and the door-cases and
windows cased with stone. The tower, which rises square, is covered with
a kind of dome crowned with a turret, whence rises a ball and fane.

The advowson of this church is in lay patrons, and the profits of the
rectory are said to amount to about 200l. _per annum_.


_St._ MARY MAGDALEN’S, Milk-street. This church was situated at the west
end of Honey lane market, in the ward of Cripplegate within; but being
destroyed by the fire of London in 1666, and not rebuilt, the parish was
annexed to that of St. Laurence Jewry.


_St._ MARY MAGDALEN’S, Old Fish street, is seated on the north side of
Knight Rider’s street, in the ward of Baynard’s castle, and is thus
denominated from its vicinity to Old Fish street. There are records of a
church in the same place three hundred and fifty years ago. The old
edifice was destroyed by the fire of London, and the present singular
structure arose from its ruins, and was built in the year 1685.

It is a small well-proportioned church, built with stone, sixty feet in
length, forty-eight in breadth, and thirty in height to the roof. It is
enlightened by a single series of arched windows, each ornamented with a
cherub and scrolls, supporting a cornice, which runs round the building;
but these windows are of such an unusual height from the ground, that
the doors, which are low and plain, open completely under them: both
these and the windows are of the same general construction, and the wall
is terminated by a balustrade. The tower is divided into two stages, in
the upper of which is a large window on each side. From the top of this
tower the work suddenly diminishes in the manner of high steps on each
side, and on the top of these is placed a turret, crowned with a very
short spire, on which is placed a fane with flames.

To this church the parish of St. Gregory is annexed, by which the
rectoral profits are much increased, the Incumbent receiving, besides
other profits, 120l. in lieu of tithes.


_St._ MARY MOUNTHAW, situated on the west side of Fish street hill, in
Queenhithe ward, received its name from its dedication to the Virgin
Mary, and the family of Montalto or Mounthauts, in the county of
Norfolk, who were the original founders: but being destroyed in the
dreadful fire of London in 1666, and not rebuilt, the parish was, by act
of Parliament, annexed to the church of St. Mary Somerset. _Stowe._


_St._ MARY, Newington Butts. See NEWINGTON BUTTS.


_St._ MARY OVERIES. See _St._ SAVIOUR’S.


_St._ MARY OVERIES _Church yard_, in the Borough.


_St._ MARY OVERIES _dock_, at the end of Church way, in the Borough.


_St._ MARY OVERIES _stairs_, Deadman’s place.


_St._ MARY, Rotherhith, is situated near the bank of the Thames, and is
distinguished from other churches dedicated to the Virgin Mary, by the
name of the place in which it is situated. The old church had stood
above 200 years, when in 1736, it was in so ruinous a condition, that
the inhabitants applied to Parliament for leave to pull it down, which
being granted, the present structure was finished in 1739.

This edifice is built with brick and ornamented with stone. It is
enlightened by a double range of windows, and the corners both in the
tower and body, are strengthened with a handsome rustic. The tower
consists of two stages; in the lower are a door and window, in the upper
a window and dial, and the whole is terminated by a balustrade, from
which rises a circular base that supports a kind of lanthorn, very
elegantly constructed with Corinthian columns; over these are urns with
flames; and from the roof of this lanthorn rises a well-constructed
spire terminated by a ball and fane.

This church is a rectory in the gift of a lay patron. The profits
arising to the Incumbent are said to amount to above 150l. _per annum_.


_The Hospital of St._ MARY ROUNCIVAL, a cell to a priory of that name in
Navarre in Spain, situated opposite the end of St. Martin’s lane, where
Northumberland house now stands. It was founded and endowed by William
Marshal, Earl of Pembroke, in the reign of Henry III. but this hospital
was however suppressed by Henry V. and re-founded by Edward IV. in 1476,
for a fraternity or brotherhood. At length it was suppressed, with the
other religious houses, by King Henry VIII. and afterwards coming to
Henry Howard, Earl of Northampton, he caused it to be demolished, and
erected upon the site thereof the edifice then named Northampton house.
See the article NORTHUMBERLAND HOUSE.


_St._ MARY SOMERSET, opposite Broken wharf in Thames street, and in
Queenhithe ward, owes the additional epithet of Somerset (according to
Mr. Stowe’s conjecture) to its vicinity to _Sumner’s het_ or _hithe_, a
small port or haven resembling that of Queenhithe. A church was situated
in this place before the year 1335; but the old edifice sharing the fate
of most of the other public buildings, in the fire of London, the
present structure was erected in its room.

The body of this edifice is enlightened by a range of lofty arched
windows, and the wall is terminated by a balustrade. A well-proportioned
square tower rises to a considerable height, and is crowned with a
handsome vase at each corner, supported on a very ornamental pedestal,
with a handsome turret between in the form of an obelisk, each supported
on the same kind of pedestal as the vases, and crowned with a ball.

The patronage of the church is in lay hands, and the parish of St. Mary
Mounthaw being annexed to it, the Incumbent’s profits are considerably
increased; he having, besides casualties and two parsonage houses, 110l.
a year in lieu of tithes, and about 30l. in glebe.


_St._ MARY SPITAL, a priory and hospital founded by Sir Walter Brune,
and Rosia, his lady, in the year 1197, who dedicated it to the honour of
Jesus Christ and his Mother the Virgin Mary, by the name of _Domus Dei &
beatæ Mariæ extra Bishopsgate_.

This hospital surrendered to Henry VIII. when its revenue was found to
amount to 478l. a year; and besides the ornaments of the church and
other goods belonging to the hospital, there were an hundred and eighty
beds for the use of the poor.

A part of a large church yard belonging to this hospital, separated from
the rest by a brick wall, was for a long time remaining, with a pulpit
cross in it, somewhat like that which formerly stood in St. Paul’s
church yard; and on the south side was a handsome house in which the
Lord Mayor, Aldermen, Sheriffs, and other persons of distinction sat to
hear the sermons preached in Easter holidays.

It was anciently the custom for some learned man, appointed by the
Bishops, to preach a sermon at St. Paul’s Cross, relating to Christ’s
passion, on Good Friday in the afternoon; and upon Easter Monday,
Tuesday, and Wednesday, other sermons were preached in the forenoon at
the Spital, on Christ’s resurrection: on Low Sunday in the forenoon a
rehearsal was made of these four sermons at St. Paul’s Cross, in which
they were either commended or censured; and, after all, the Priest made
a sermon himself.

At these sermons the Lord Mayor and Aldermen were usually present, with
their wives; and since the reformation these sermons are continued by
the name of _Spital Sermons_ at St. Bride’s in Fleet street, on Easter
Monday, Tuesday, and Wednesday.

The pulpit cross was broke down in the grand rebellion. _Maitland._


_St._ MARY’S STAINING, a small church, formerly seated on the north side
of Oat lane, in the ward of Aldersgate within. The reason why it
received the additional epithet of _Staining_, is very uncertain; some
imagining it to be derived from the painter stainers, who might probably
live near it; while others suppose that it was originally called _Stany_
or _Stony_ from its being built with stone, to distinguish it from those
in the city built with wood, &c. This ancient edifice, however, being
destroyed by the fire of London, and not rebuilt, the parish was united
to St. Michael’s Wood street. _Stowe._


_St._ MARY WHITECHAPEL, was originally erected as a chapel of ease to
the church of St. Dunstan, Stepney; and from its external appearance
probably received the additional epithet of _White_. We read of this
church in 1329, and the first chapel was probably of much greater
antiquity.

The church was anciently denominated _St. Mary Matsellon_, a name which
some have ridiculously supposed was derived from the women of the parish
having killed a Frenchman, about the year 1428, for murdering and
robbing his benefactress, a religious widow, who had generously brought
him up almost from his infancy: but this church was known by this name
above an hundred years before this bloody catastrophe. Mr. Strype,
therefore, in his edition of _Stowe’s Survey_, with greater appearance
of reason derives the name from the Hebrew or Syriac word _Matsel_ which
signifies a woman who has lately brought forth a son; alluding to Mary’s
being delivered of our Saviour: however, this name has given way to the
more ancient one of Whitechapel, which is even given to the long street
by which the edifice is situated.

The old church being in a very ruinous condition in 1673, it was taken
down and rebuilt in the present form. It is a coarse and very irregular
building. The body, which is built with brick, and ornamented with stone
rustic work at the corners, is ninety-three feet in length; sixty-three
in breadth; and the height of the tower and turret eighty feet. The
principal door is adorned with a kind of rustic pilasters, with
cherubims heads by way of capitals, and a pediment above. The body has
many windows, which are of various forms and different sizes, a sort of
Venetian, oval and square. The square windows have ill-proportioned
circular pediments, and the oval, or more properly elliptic windows
(some of which stand upright, and others crosswise) are surrounded with
thick festoons. The steeple, which is of stone, and appears to be a part
of the old structure, rises above the principal door, and is crowned
with a plain square battlement; in the center of which rises a small
turret with its dome and fane. _English Architecture._

This church is a rectory, in the gift of the Principal and Scholars of
King’s Hall and Brazen Nose College, Oxford. The Incumbent’s profits,
according to Mr. Maitland, amount to about 350l. _per annum_.


_St._ MARY WOOLCHURCH-HAW, stood on the east side of Stocks market, in
Walbrook ward, and received its additional appellation from a beam in
the church yard for the weighing of wool; for in that church yard was
anciently kept the wool staple: but this church being destroyed by the
fire of London, and not rebuilt, the parish was annexed to the church of
St. Mary Woolnoth. _Maitland._


_St._ MARY WOOLNOTH, at the corner of Sherborne lane, and adjoining to
the Post Office in Lombard street, is supposed to derive its additional
epithet of Woolnoth from its being almost contiguous to the above wool
staple, whence it might be called _Woolneah_ or _Woolnigh_, which, by an
easy transition, might pass into Woolnoth.

We read of a church with the same addition in 1355. The last suffered by
the fire in 1666, when every thing within it was destroyed but the
walls; however, being soon after repaired, it continued in a very crazy
condition, till it was appointed to be one of the fifty new churches to
be erected within the bills of mortality.

In digging a foundation for the present church in 1716, there were
discovered, at the depth of fifteen, and twenty-two feet, a great
variety of Roman earthen vessels, both for sacred and profane uses; but
all broken, together with a considerable number of the tusks and bones
of boars and goats, with several medals and pieces of metal; some
tesselated work, a part of an aqueduct, and at the bottom of all a well
full of dirt, which was no sooner removed, than a fine spring arose, in
which is placed a pump with an iron bason. By the great quantity of
pot-sheards, &c. found in this place, Mr. Maitland is of opinion, that
here was a pottery; and from the tusks and bones he imagines, that near
this place stood the temple of Concord, mentioned by the Romans.

The new church was finished in the year 1719, and is a very handsome
structure built with stone. On the north side which fronts Lombard
street, instead of windows there are three very large and lofty niches
adorned with Ionic columns, and surrounded with a bold rustic. Over
these is a large cornice, upon which is placed a balustrade. The
entrance is at the well end by a lofty rustic arch, over which rises an
oblong tower, ornamented with six Composite columns in the front, and
two on the sides; upon this is raised a lesser tower of the same form
crowned with a balustrade, from the center of which rises a flag staff
with a fane. The windows are on the south side, where the edifice is
intirely surrounded with houses.

It would be impossible, perhaps, to find a place in the whole city where
the principal ornaments of a building could be more completely
concealed. The tower can no where be seen to advantage, and can scarce
any where be seen at all, except on the roofs of the neighbouring houses
and the opposite garret windows: a great deal of expence has therefore
been here thrown away in ornaments, to very little purpose.

The advowson of this church was in the Prioress and Convent of St.
Helen’s in Bishopsgate street, till at their dissolution they fell to
the Crown; when King Henry VIII. granted it to Sir Martin Bowes, in
whose family it has ever since continued. The Rector, besides
casualties, receives about 22l. a year in glebe, and 160l. _per annum_,
in lieu of tithes.


MASONS. This company had their arms granted by Clarencieux, King at
arms, in the year 1477, though the members were not incorporated by
letters patent, till they obtained them from King Charles II. in 1677.
This fraternity is governed by a Master, two Wardens, twenty-two
Assistants, and seventy Liverymen, whose fine on admission is 5l. They
have a small convenient hall in Masons alley, Basinghall street.
_Maitland._


MASONS _alley_, Basinghall street; so called from Masons hall within it.


MASONS _arms yard_, Madox street.*


MASON’S _court_, Brick lane, Spitalfields.†


MASON’S _stairs_, Bankside.†


MASON’S _yard_. North Audley street.†


MAST _yard_, 1. Ratcliff highway. 2. Wapping.


MASTER OF THE CEREMONIES, an officer appointed by King James I. for the
more honourable reception of Ambassadors and strangers of quality. As a
badge of his office he wears a gold chain, to which hangs a medal that
has on one side an emblem of Peace placed under the crown of England,
with King James’s motto BEATI PACIFICI, and on the other an emblem of
War, with the words DIEU ET MON DROIT. His salary is 300l. a year. He
has under him an Assistant and a Marshal, the latter of whom has 6s. 8d.
a day. _Chamberlain’s Present State._


MASTERS IN CHANCERY. See the article _Masters in_ CHANCERY.


MASTER OF THE HORSE, the third great officer of the King’s court, has
the management and disposal of all the King’s stables and breed of
horses; he has authority over the equeries and pages, coachmen, footmen,
grooms, riders of the great horse, farriers and smiths; he appoints all
the other tradesmen who work for the King’s stables, and by his warrant
to the avenor makes them give an oath to be true and faithful. In short,
he is intrusted with all the lands and revenues, appropriated for the
King’s breed of horses, the expences of the stable, and of the coaches,
litters, &c.

He alone has the privilege of making use of any of the horses, pages, or
footmen belonging to his Majesty’s stables; and at any solemn cavalcade
he rides next the King, and leads a horse of state. His salary is 1276l.
13s. 4d. _per annum_.


MASTER OF THE HOUSHOLD, an officer under the Lord Treasurer of the
King’s house, whose office is to survey the accounts of the house.


MASTER OF THE JEWEL HOUSE, an officer who has the care of all the gold
and silver plate used at the King’s table; as also of all the loose
jewels, chains, &c. in the Tower of London.


MASTER OF THE REVELS, an officer under the Lord Chamberlain, has the
management of all the masques and comedies at court, and has a salary of
100l. a year.


MASTER OF THE ROBES, an officer who orders all his Majesty’s robes, as
those of his coronation, of St. George’s feast, and of Parliament, and
of his wearing apparel. He has a salary of 500l. _per annum_, and under
him is a yeoman, three grooms, a page, a brusher, a sempstress, &c.


MATCH _walk_, Upper Shadwell.


MATHAM’S _court_, Threadneedle alley, Little Moorfields.†


MATTHAS’S _court_, Great Hermitage street.†


_St._ MATTHEW’S, Bethnal Green. See BETHNAL GREEN.


_St._ MATTHEW’S _Friday street_, is situated on the west side of that
street in the ward of Faringdon within, and owes its name to its
dedication to St. Matthew the Evangelist, and its situation. The old
church being destroyed by the fire of London in 1666, the present
structure was erected in its place. It is a plain stone building, with
one series of large arched windows, and at the east end is the steeple,
which consists of a square brick tower, void of all ornament.

The patronage of this rectory was anciently in the Abbot and Convent of
Westminster, and upon their suppression, when the conventual church was
converted into a cathedral, Henry VIII. conferred it upon the Bishop;
but the new bishopric being soon after dissolved, King Edward VI.
granted it to the Bishop of London, in whom the advowson still
continues. To this church the parish of St. Peter Cheap is united.


MAUDLIN’S _rents_, Nightingale lane, East Smithfield.†


MAUL’S _court_, Fore street, Cripplegate.†


MAXHAM’S _court_, Long alley.†


MAXIMUS _court_, Moorfields.†


MAXIN’S _court_, Moorfields.†


MAY FAIR, near Hyde Park; so called from a fair annually held there in
the month of May.


MAY FAIR _street_, near Hyde Park.


MAYFIELD’S _buildings_, near Rag Fair.


_Lord_ MAYOR. The chief magistrate of this metropolis was, before the
Norman conquest, called the Portreve, or Portgrave, which title in the
reign of Henry II. was changed for that of Mayor, a name by which the
chief magistrate of the city of Roan, the capital of Normandy, was then
distinguished. In 1215 the citizens obtained from King John a charter
which granted them the privilege of chusing this magistrate, which was
afterwards confirmed by several other royal grants; and the Mayors were
elected by the court of Aldermen, and a number of Commons summoned by
them, out of each of the wards; but the number thus summoned being
occasionally varied at the discretion of the Aldermen, gave great
uneasiness to the commonalty, for the removing of which the method of
election was altered by an act of Common Council in the year 1476, and
the present manner of electing by the Livery of the several companies
was established: by virtue of which the Lord Mayor is annually chosen on
Michaelmas day.

For this purpose the Liverymen on that day assemble in Guildhall, where,
by holding up of hands, they usually chuse two of the senior Aldermen
below the chair, who being returned to the court of Lord Mayor and
Aldermen, the senior is generally declared Lord Mayor elect.

Some time after, the Lord Mayor elect, accompanied by the Recorder and
several of the Aldermen, is presented to the Lord Chancellor, as his
Majesty’s representative, for his approbation, without which the person
elected has no legal authority to perform the office: but this being
obtained, he is on the eighth of November sworn into his office at
Guildhall, and the following day before the Barons of the Exchequer at
Westminster.

The ninth of November being the day on which the Lord Mayor elect enters
upon his office, the Aldermen and Sheriffs attend him to Guildhall in
their coaches, and about noon proceed from thence in their coaches to
the Three Cranes stairs, where the Lord Mayor, the Lord Mayor elect, the
Aldermen, Recorder, and Sheriffs, go on board the city barge, and
attended by the several city companies in their several barges, adorned
with flags and pendants, proceed by water to Westminster, where his
Lordship having taken the oaths prescribed, returns in the same pompous
manner to Black Friars stairs, whence the livery of many of the city
companies, preceded by colours and bands of music, march to their
stands, which are erected on both sides the streets through which his
Lordship is to pass.

The Lord Mayor being at length landed at Black Friars, he is preceded by
the Artillery company, which is followed by the company of which the
Lord Mayor is free. After them follow several others with their music,
flags, and streamers, and among the rest the armourers have a person
riding on horseback, completely dressed in polished armour. At length
march the Lord Mayor’s domestics and servants, followed by his Lordship
in the coach of state, and after him come the Aldermen, Recorder,
Sheriffs, Chamberlain, Common Serjeant, Town Clerk, &c. in their several
coaches and chariots, and in this manner proceed to Guildhall, where a
noble entertainment is provided, as there is also for the several
Companies at their respective halls.

The power of this great officer is at present much more considerable
than it was formerly, for he is not only the King’s representative in
the civil government of the city, but also First Commissioner of the
lieutenancy, perpetual Coroner and Escheator within the city and
liberties of London and the borough of Southwark; Chief Justice of oyer,
terminer and goal-delivery of Newgate; Judge of the court of wardmote at
the election of Aldermen; Conservator of the rivers Thames and Medway;
so that if any citizen or apprentice of London be carried away, and by
force detained on ship-board, he can, by his warrant, compel the Captain
or Master of such vessel to release such citizen: he is also perpetual
Commissioner in all affairs relating to the river Lea, and chief Butler
of the kingdom at all coronations, when his fee for that service is a
gold cup and cover, with a golden ewer.

The Lord Mayor upon public occasions wears either scarlet or purple
robes richly furred, with a velvet hood and gold chain or collar of SS.
When he goes abroad in his state coach, the Mace-bearer sits upon a
stool in the middle facing one of the windows, and the Sword-bearer upon
another stool facing the other, and when on foot his train is supported
by a page, and the mace and sword carried before him.

The principal officers for the support of his dignity, are the
Sword-bearer, the Common Hunt, Common Crier, and Water Bailiff, who have
all great salaries or perquisites, with each the title of Esquire. He
has also three Serjeant Carvers, three Serjeants of the chamber, a
Serjeant of the channel, two Yeomen of the chamber, four Yeomen of the
water side, a Yeoman of the channel, an Under Water Bailiff, six Yeomen
waiters, three Meal weighers, two Yeomen of the wood wharf, and an
officer called a Foreign taker. _Maitland._


_Lord_ MAYOR’S COURT. This is a court of record held before the Lord
Mayor, Aldermen, and Recorder, every Tuesday in Guildhall, wherein
actions of debt, trespass, attachments, covenants, &c. arising within
the city and liberties, of any value, may be tried, and actions from the
Sheriff’s court removed hither, before the jury be sworn.

This is also a court of equity, relating to affairs transacted within
the city and liberties; it giving relief when judgment is obtained in
the Sheriff’s court for more than the just debt.

This court is, in several respects, the best to commence a process in;
since an action, exclusive of stamps, may be entered for so small a sum
as four pence; and yet, though not proceeded upon, it never dies, as
those in other courts. Besides, a suit may be begun and ended here
within the space of fourteen days, for thirty shillings.

The juries for trying causes in this and the Sheriff’s courts, are
annually returned at Christmas by the several courts of wardmote, when
each ward appoints a sufficient number of persons to serve on those
juries for every month of the year.

This court has an office peculiar to itself, consisting of four
Attorneys, by whom all actions cognizable therein are entered; for the
execution thereof there are six Serjeants at mace. _Lex Lond._


_Court of Lord_ MAYOR AND ALDERMEN. This is also a court of record, in
which is lodged a great part of the executive power of the city, whereby
all leases and other instruments that pass the city seal are executed;
the assize of bread ascertained; contests relating to water courses and
party walls, adjusted; and the city officers suspended and punished,
according to the nature of their offences.

This court has a power of annually electing eleven overseers or rulers
of the fraternity of watermen; and a right of fixing their several taxes
with the approbation of the Privy Council; and likewise a right of
disposing of most of the places belonging to the city officers.


MAYPOLE _alley_, 1. Fenchurch street. 2. Holiwell street. 3. St.
Margaret’s Hill. 4. St. Olave street. 5. Wych street.


MAY’S _alley_, Wheeler street.†


MAY’S _buildings_, Bedfordbury.†


MAY’S FARM, Dog row, Mile End.†


MAY’S _yard_, Barnaby street.†


MAZE _court_, Tooley street.


MAZE _pond_, near Snow fields, Southwark.


MAZE POND _street_, Southwark.


MAZE _street_, Tooley street.


MEAD’S _court_, Bond street.


MEAL _yard_, Fleet market.


MEARD’S _court_, 1. Dean street.† 2. Wardour street.†


MEAT _wharf_, Mill bank.


MEDIFORD _court_, a handsome large court in Fenchurch street.†


MEETING HOUSE _alley_, 1. Greenbank.⸸ Johnson’s street.⸸ 3. Queen
street, Rotherhith.⸸


MEETING HOUSE _court_, 1. Black Friars.⸸ 2. Drury lane.⸸ 3. St.
Michael’s lane, Canon street.⸸ 4. Stony lane.⸸


MEETING HOUSE _yard_, 1. Broad street, London Wall.⸸ 2. Deadman’s place,
Southwark.⸸ 3. Devonshire square, Bishopsgate street without.⸸. 4. Five
foot lane.†. 5. Gravel lane, Houndsditch.⸸ 6. Little St. Helen’s,
Bishopsgate street within.⸸ 7. St. Michael’s lane, Canon street.⸸ 8.
Nightingale lane.⸸ 9. Old Horselydown lane.⸸ 10. Old Jewry.⸸ 11. Silver
street, Wood street, Cheapside.⸸ 12. Water lane.⸸ 13. Wentworth street.⸸
14. West lane.⸸


MEETING HOUSES. Of these there are above an hundred and twenty within
the bills of mortality. See a particular account of them under the names
of the several denominations of Protestant Dissenters, as BAPTISTS,
INDEPENDENTS, PRESBYTERIANS, &c.


MEGGS’ _Almshouse_, on the south side of Whitechapel, was founded about
sixty-five years ago, by William Meggs, Esq; for the reception of twelve
widows, each of whom has a room, and annually receives 5l. 4s. and a
chaldron of coals.


MELANCHOLY _walk_, St. George’s fields.


MERCERS, the first of the twelve principal companies, was incorporated
by letters patent granted by King Richard II. in the year 1393. The
members are not only exempt from quarterage, but upon their admission to
the livery, pay only a fine of 2l. 13s. 4d.

This fraternity is governed by a Prime and three other Wardens, with
forty Assistants, and 232 Liverymen.


MERCERS HALL, and Chapel, are situated in Cheapside, between the Old
Jewry and Ironmonger lane, on the spot where anciently stood an hospital
dedicated to St. Thomas of Acars or Acons. They were both destroyed by
the fire of London; after which they were rebuilt by the company. The
front, which is towards Cheapside, is adorned with a very handsome
entrance; the door case is enriched with the figures of two Cupids
mantling the company’s arms, and with festoons, &c. and over it the
balcony is adorned with two pilasters of the Ionic order, and a
pediment; with the figures of Faith, Hope and Charity, and other
enrichments.

The inner court is adorned with piazzas, formed of columns of the Doric
order; the hall room and great parlour are wainscoted with oak, and
ornamented with Ionic pilasters; and the ceiling with fret-work.

The chapel is neatly wainscoted, and paved with black and white marble.


MERCERS _court_, 1. St. Mary hill. 2. Tower hill. 3. Tower street.


MERCERS SCHOOL, in the Old Jewry, was, as well as their hall and chapel,
a part of the hospital of St. Thomas of Acons; but that hospital being
surrendered to Henry VIII. in 1531, it was purchased by the company of
Mercers, and the ancient school continued; the Master having a salary of
40l. _per annum_, with a commodious dwelling house, for which he is
obliged to teach twenty-five boys grammatical learning. _Maitland._


MERCERS _street_, Long Acre; so called from its belonging to that
company.


MERCHANT ADVENTURERS. See HAMBURGH MERCHANTS.


MERCHANT TAYLORS, the seventh of the twelve principal companies, was
incorporated by Edward IV. in the year 1466; and was anciently
denominated _Taylors and Linen Armourers_: but many of the company being
great merchants, and Henry VII. one of the members, that Prince in the
year 1503 re-incorporated it, by the name of, _The Master and Wardens of
the Merchant Taylors of the fraternity of St. John the Baptist, in the
city of London_.

This fraternity is governed by a Master, four Wardens, thirty-eight
Assistants, and 394 Liverymen, who upon their admission pay a fine of
20l. The company is possessed of a great estate, out of which they pay
to charitable uses, pursuant to the wills of the respective donors,
about 2000l. _per annum_.

This company has a spacious hall on the south side of Threadneedle
street. _Strype’s Stowe._


MERCHANT TAYLORS _Almshouse_, near the west end of Rosemary lane,
contains twenty-six apartments for so many poor widows, the relicts of
deceased members, who annually receive 6l. and a chaldron of coals each,
with a gown every third year. _Maitland._


MERCHANT TAYLORS _rents_, Moor lane.


MERCHANT TAYLORS SCHOOL, in Suffolk lane, Thames street, was founded by
the company of Merchant Taylors in the year 1568, for the education of
boys. It was anciently kept in a house which belonged to the Duke of
Buckingham, and was called the Manor of the Rose; but that edifice being
destroyed by the fire of London in 1666, the present structure was
erected upon the same spot.

The school is a long and spacious building, supported on the east by
many stone pillars that form an handsome cloister, within which are
apartments for the three Ushers. Adjoining to the school is a library
supported also by stone pillars, and well furnished with books. And on
the south of the library is the part called the chapel. Contiguous to
these is a large house appropriated to the use of the head Master.

The school consists of eight forms, in which near three hundred boys
have their education; an hundred of whom, according to the constitutions
of the company, are taught _gratis_; an hundred more at 5s. and fifty at
2s. 6d. a quarter.

The head Master receives from the company a salary of 10l. 6s. _per
annum_, and thirty shillings for water; besides the quarterage from the
scholars, which renders his salary very considerable. The first Usher
has 30l. a year, and the two last 25l. _per annum_, and all of them have
proper apartments.

Several of the scholars are annually sent to St. John’s College, Oxford,
which seems to have been founded by Sir Thomas White chiefly for their
use, as they have no less than forty-six fellowships in that college.

For the better inquiry into the proficiency of all the scholars, there
are four probations in the year performed only by the Master and Ushers;
the first on the 11th of March; the second on the 15th of June; the
third on the 11th of September; and the fourth on the 11th of December,
not being Sundays, and then upon the next day following.

For the farther satisfaction of the Master, Wardens, and court of
Assistants of the Merchant Taylors, the probations themselves undergo an
examination twice every year, by two judicious men well learned in
Hebrew, Greek and Latin, appointed by the Master and Wardens of the
company. Upon these days, which are between the 11th and 21st of March,
and September, the Master and Wardens, or at least two of them, are
present. The examination, which is performed in the chapel, begins at
six in the morning and ends at eleven. These are called the Doctors
days. After the examination is finished, the audience, which is
generally pretty numerous, returns into the school, where certain public
exercises are performed by the eight senior scholars, or monitors of the
school.

There is yet another public examination of the scholars of the upper
form, by the President and Fellows of St. John’s College, Oxford,
annually performed upon the 11th of June, previous to the election of
scholars to be made upon that day, to fill up the vacant fellowships in
that college: and after the public exercises are finished, the Dean of
the college addresses himself to the scholars, out of whose number the
vacancy is to be filled up, in a Latin speech suited to the occasion.

At this time an account is usually printed, containing the names and
order of the head scholars, their births, admission, and continuance in
the head form; and also an account of the subjects of the orations.
_Stowe’s Survey, last edit._ _Maitland._


MERCHANTS WATERWORKS for raising water. To this office belong three
engines, a windmill in Tottenham court road fields, and lately by two
water mills, turned by the common sewer, one at Tom’s coffee-house in
St. Martin’s lane, and the other in Northumberland street, late
Hartshorn lane, in the Strand. From these engines issue three main pipes
of six and seven inch bore, from which the neighbourhood of those places
are supplied with water.

This company, after defraying all charges, divide the profits every half
year. Their office is kept in Rathbone place, Oxford street.


MERMAID _alley_, in the Borough.*


MERMAID _court_, 1. Charing Cross.* 2. Great Carter lane.* 3. St.
Margaret’s hill.* 4. Pater noster row, Cheapside.* 5. Ratcliff Cross.*


MERRICK _street_, New Bond street.†


MESSENGER’S _rents_, Still alley.†


METCALF’S _court_, Jacob’s street, Rotherhith.†


METHODISTS, a body of Dissenters from the church of England, who have
several meeting houses in this metropolis: 1. At the Foundery, Windmill
hill. 2. Beech lane. 3. Bull and Mouth street. 4. Marybon fields, which
is more properly a chapel of the church of England, the service of the
church being performed by one of the principal founders of the sect of
Methodists. 5. St. Agnes le Clare. 6. West street, Seven Dials.


MEWS, the stables for the King’s horses near Charing Cross, is a place
of considerable antiquity, and is thus denominated from _Mew_, a term
used among falconers, signifying to moult or cast feathers; for this
place was used for the accommodation of the King’s falconers and hawks,
so early as the year 1377; but the King’s stables at Lomesbury, since
called Bloomsbury, being destroyed by fire in the year 1537, King Henry
VIII. caused the hawks to be removed, and the Mews enlarged and fitted
up for the reception of his Majesty’s horses, where they have been kept
ever since: the building going to decay, the north side was rebuilt in a
magnificent manner by his present Majesty, in the year 1732.

[Illustration:

  _S. Wale delin._ _B. Green sculp._
  _Part of the Meuse and S^t. Martins Church._
]

There is something in this part of the intended building of the Mews
very noble, particularly the center, which is enriched with columns and
a pediment, and the continuity of the architecture preserved. The
smaller pediment and rustic arch under the cupolas or lanthorns are
properly subordinate, but set so close to the balustrade that its
intent, as a gallery, is thereby destroyed. In the view given in the
print scarce half the front is seen: and over some old houses you see
the beautiful steeple and part of the portico of St. Martin’s church,
which has the general fate of our public buildings, to be so incumbered
with houses as to have no place to view them to advantage.

Upon viewing this edifice, it is impossible not to be offended at the
wretched buildings which form the other sides of the square. It is
indeed much to be wished that they were made to correspond with the main
building; this, if it were done, and a suitable regular entrance made
from Charing Cross, would make the royal stables one of the greatest
ornaments of this metropolis. Some of the finest horses in the kingdom,
both for the coach and saddle, may here be seen.


MEWS, Devonshire square, Bishopsgate street.


_St._ MICHAEL’S _alley_, by the side of St. Michael’s church, Cornhill.


_St._ MICHAEL BASSISHAW, a church on the west side of Basinghall street,
so denominated from its dedication to St. Michael the Archangel, and its
situation near _Basing’s haw_ or hall. A church dedicated to the same
patron has stood here from about the year 1140, but the last edifice
being destroyed by the fire of London, the present structure was erected
in its place. _Newc. Rep. Eccles._

The walls are strengthened with rustic work at the corners, and the body
well enlightened by a single series of large windows; at the east end,
where the top is terminated by an arch, the light is given by three
windows, one of them tall and upright, the two others circular. The
steeple is a tower crowned with a turret, from which rises a kind of
spire.

The patronage of this rectory appears to have been anciently in the
Bishop of London; after which it fell into lay hands; but at last came
to the Dean and Chapter of St. Paul’s, where it has ever since
continued, but is subject to the Archdeacon. The Rector receives 132l.
11s. _per annum_ in lieu of tithes.


_St._ MICHAEL’S, an ancient parochial chapel, which stood at the end of
Leadenhall street, where is now the row of houses fronting Aldgate; and
the remains of this chapel are still to be seen under the corner house
of Leadenhall street. They extend thirty-six feet from north to south,
and sixteen from east to west, and there is still standing the Gothic
arched roof, which is supported by handsome pillars; the whole built
with square brick, chalk, and stone. _Maitland._


_St._ MICHAEL’S CORNHILL, on the east side of St. Michael’s alley. We
find that a church was situated here, dedicated to the same holy angel,
so early as before the year 1133; but the last edifice being destroyed
with the other public buildings by the fire of London, the present
Gothic structure was raised in its stead. _Stowe._

The body is seventy feet long and sixty broad, the height to the roof is
thirty-five feet, and that of the tower an hundred and thirty feet. The
lower part of the tower occupies the center, and on each side there is a
regular extent of building. The principal door opens in the lower stage
of the tower, which rises with angulated corners from the ground,
forming a kind of base, terminated at the height of the body of the
church. The second stage, which is plain and lofty, has two tall
windows, one over the other, properly shaped for the style of the
building; this is terminated with a truly Gothic cornice. The third
stage is exactly in the form of the two others, only they are plain, and
this is covered with ornaments, the angulated corners are fluted, and
terminated by cherubims heads under a cornice: the plain face between
has four windows in two series. Above the cornice, over the uppermost of
these windows, runs a battlement on the plain faces of the tower, and
from the corners are carried up four beautiful fluted turrets, cased a
part of their height with Doric turrets; these terminate in pinacle
heads, from within which rises a spire at each corner crowned with a
fane. The author of the _Critical Review of the public buildings_
observes, that this Gothic tower is very magnificent, and justly
deserves to be esteemed the finest thing of that sort in London.

The advowson of this church was anciently in the Abbot and Canons of
Evesham; but in 1503 they conveyed it to the Drapers company, who
settled upon that convent a perpetual annuity of 5l. 6s. 8d. and that
company have been its patrons ever since. The Rector, instead of
uncertain tithes, has by act of Parliament a settled stipend of 140l. a
year.


_St._ MICHAEL’S CROOKED LANE, on the east side of St. Michael’s lane, in
Candlewick ward, receives its additional epithet from its vicinity to
Crooked lane. A church dedicated to St. Michael stood in the same place
before the year 1304; but suffering by the fire of London in 1666 was
soon after rebuilt.

It is a plain Structure built with stone, and enlightened by a series of
large arched windows. The tower, which is at the west end, is carried
square to a considerable height, and the uppermost window in the center
of each face, is ornamented with a head, and handsome festoons. From
hence, instead of a balustrade, is a range of open work of the Gothic
kind, with vases at the corners. From within this part, the tower rises
circular, diminishing in three stages, with an open buttress rising from
each corner of the square tower, to the top of the first stage; from
this buttress rises a large scroll to the top of the second, and a
smaller to the top of the third stage, above which rises a kind of short
round spire of a peculiar kind, it swelling out at the bottom, and then
rounding off, rises to a small height, where it is terminated by a gilt
ball and fane.

The patronage of this church was anciently in the Prior and Convent of
Canterbury, in whom it continued till the year 1408, since which time it
has been in the Archbishops of that see, and is one of the thirteen
peculiars in this city belonging to Canterbury. The Rector, in
conformity to an act of Parliament granted in the reign of King Charles
II. receives, besides his other profits, 100l. _per annum_ in lieu of
tithes.

Among the several monuments in this church, is that of Sir William
Walworth who slew Wat Tyler. See the article LONDON. The inscription, as
given by Mr. Weaver, in his Funeral Monuments, is as follows:

  Here under lyth a man of fame,
  William Walworth callyd by name;
  Fishmonger he was in life time here,
  And twise Lord Mayor, as in bookes appere;
  Who with courage stout and manly might,
  Slew Wat Tyler in King Richard’s sight;
  For which act done, and trew intent,
  The King made him Knight incontinent:
  And gave him armes, as here may see,
  To declare his fact and chivalrie.
  He left this life the yere of our God
  Thirteene hundryd fourscore and three od.

Here is also a monument erected to the honour of Queen Elizabeth; and
the following very concise inscription on the tomb of William Wray.

  Here lyeth, wrapt in clay,
  The body of William Wray,
  I have no more to say.


_St._ MICHAEL’S _lane_, in Great Eastcheap, by the above church.


_St._ MICHAEL’S QUEENHITHE, situated on the north side of Thames street,
in the ward of Queenhithe, opposite to the great wharf and buildings of
that name, was about the year 1181, denominated St. Michael de
Cornhithe, which may lead us to the origin of the name by which we at
present call that wharf, and this church from its situation near it; as
the quantities of corn brought thither down the Thames might occasion
the original name, and Queenhithe be only a corrupt way of speaking it.

The old church being consumed by the dreadful fire in 1666, the present
structure was erected in its room. It consists of a well-proportioned
body, enlightened by two series of windows, the first a range of tall
arched ones, and over these a range of large porthole windows, above
which are cherubims heads, and underneath festoons, that adorn the lower
part, and fall between the tops of the under series. The tower is plain
but well-proportioned, and is terminated by a spire crowned with a fane
in the form of a little ship.

This church has all along been in the gift of the Dean and Chapter of
St. Paul’s, and is subject to the Archdeacon. On its being rebuilt the
parish of the Trinity was united to it, by which the Rector’s fees were
considerably augmented, who, besides his other advantages, receives
160l. _per annum_, in lieu of tithes.


_St._ MICHAEL QUERNE, a church which stood at the west end of Cheapside,
between Blowbladder street and Pater noster row, and had a narrow
passage at the west end. We have an account of this edifice so early as
the year 1181, when it appears to have been only a chapel, since the
first Rector was buried in it in 1461. in old records it is called _St.
Michael ad Bladum_; that is, _At the Corn_, which was corrupted to
Querne. It was also sometimes denominated _St. Michael de Macello_, from
its vicinity to the flesh market.

This ancient edifice being burnt by the fire of London, the place on
which it stood was, by act of Parliament, laid into the street, in order
to enlarge it, and the parish united to the church of St. Vedast, in
Foster lane. _Stowe’s Survey._ _Newc. Rep. Eccles._


_St._ MICHAEL ROYAL, on the east side of College hill, in Vintry ward,
is thus denominated from its being anciently near the Tower Royal. This
was a parish church before the year 1285, when it was under the
patronage of the Prior and Canons of Canterbury, in whom it continued
till it was converted into a college by Sir Richard Whittington, mercer,
four times Lord Mayor, who rebuilt the church; but even then the monks
of Canterbury so far continued its patrons, as to present a person
nominated by the Master and Wardens of the Mercers company. This church
being consumed with the other public buildings by the fire of London,
the present structure was erected in its room, and the parish of St.
Martin Vintry united to it. _Newc. Rep. Eccles._ _Stowe’s Survey._

This structure is a plain, decent, and substantial stone building,
enlightened by a single series of large arched windows, placed so high
that the doors open under the level of their bottoms. The tower consists
of three stages, and at the top is surrounded with carved open work
instead of a balustrade: from hence rises a light and elegant turret
adorned with Ionic columns, and ending in a fine diminution, which
supports the fane.

This church is one of the thirteen peculiars belonging to the Archbishop
of Canterbury, and the Rector, besides his other profits, receives 140l.
a year in lieu of tithes. Among the several monumental inscriptions, was
one in memory of the above Sir Richard Whittington.


_St._ MICHAEL’S WOOD STREET, is seated on the west side of Wood street,
in Cripplegate ward. An old church, dedicated to the same patron, stood
there in the year 1392, and probably another succeeded it towards the
close of the fifteenth century; however, in 1666 the church then
standing was destroyed by the fire of London, and the present structure,
which rose in its place, was finished a few years after, and the Parish
of St. Mary Staining united to it.

As the east end of this edifice is the most conspicuous part, it is
ornamented with four Ionic columns raised upon a continued pedestal,
with arches between, and supporting a handsome pediment, in the middle
of which is a circular window. Between the columns are three upright
arched windows, that fill the whole space. The rest of the body is
plain, and the windows are raised so high that the doors open under
them.

The tower consists of three plain stages with large windows, from the
uppermost of which rises a small square course, the foundation of the
base of the turret. This base is cut away from the breadth of the tower
gradually to the diameter of the turret, which is plain, but handsome;
and from its top rises a ball that supports the fane.

The patronage of this church was in the Abbot and Convent of St. Alban’s
till the suppression of that monastery, when Henry VIII. sold it to
William Barwell, who in the year 1588, conveyed it to several persons in
trust for the parish, in which it still continues. The Rector, besides
his other profits, receives 100l. a year in lieu of tithes.


MIDDLE _court_, 1. Bernard’s Inn, Holborn. 2. Clement’s Inn.


MIDDLE _row_, 1. St. Giles’s. 2. Goswell street. 3. Holborn. 4. Gray’s
Inn lane.


MIDDLE SCOTLAND _yard_, Whitehall.


MIDDLE SHADWELL, near Shadwell market.


MIDDLE SHADWELL _lane_, Middle Shadwell.


MIDDLE _Street_, 1. Cloth Fair. 2. Horselydown.


MIDDLE TEMPLE, Fleet street. See the article TEMPLE.


MIDDLE TEMPLE _lane_, a lane that leads from Fleet street to the Middle
Temple.


MIDDLE TURNING _lane_, Shadwell.


MIDDLESEX _court_, 1. Drury lane. 2. Little Bartholomew close.


MIDDLESEX HOSPITAL, for the reception of the sick and the lame, and for
lying-in married women, in Marybon Fields near Oxford road. This is a
neat, plain, and not inelegant brick building: it has the decent
appearance and all the accommodations one would wish in a house devoted
to charity, without that ostentatious magnificence which too often in a
great measure defeats the humane and noble end of such pious and
charitable institutions, where those sums are squandered away in useless
decorations, that ought to be employed in administering health to the
sick, and giving feet to the lame.

Nature and religion patronize every instance of distress, but most
powerfully befriend that deepest of all distresses, sickness in poverty.
Sickness itself will excite compassion, though alleviated by every
comfort and advantage of wealth. How much stronger a sympathy must then
arise at the sight or idea of sickness imbittered by poverty! or
considered in another view, of poverty disabled by sickness! Most men
are inclined, but very few, in comparison, have the power to relieve it.
Public contributions, therefore, seemed the most likely to effect what
the private bounty of individuals could not. This gave rise, in the
present charitable age, to infirmaries, and in particular to this, which
has the merit and the honour of being the first hospital in this kingdom
for lying-in women; and of setting an example which has been so happily
followed.

The charitable designs of this hospital were carried on for several
years in two convenient houses adjoining to each other, in Windmill
street, Tottenham court road, where the first institution in August
1745, was intended only for the relief of the indigent sick and lame:
but in July 1747, the Governors willing to render it more worthy of the
notice of the public, extended their plan to the relief of the pregnant
wives of the industrious poor: when the great increase of patients,
occasioned by the reputation of this twofold charity, soon obliged the
Governors to think of enlarging their edifice, as well as their plan;
and the kind benevolence of the public by donations, legacies, &c.
enabled them in 1755, to erect a much larger and more convenient
building in Marybon Fields, wherein the apartments for the reception of
the lying-in women are in a separate part of the building, remote from
the sick and lame; and that ladies may visit the lying-in patients,
without being incommoded by the sick and lame, different stair-cases
lead to each, the lying-in wards having no communication with the sick
and lame.

The qualification of a Governor of this charity is an annual
subscription of three guineas; which also intitles the subscriber to
recommend, and have in the house at one time, either one sick or lame
patient, or one lying-in woman, and to recommend out-patients, A
subscription of five guineas _per annum_ intitles the subscriber to
recommend one sick or lame in-patient, out-patients, and one lying-in
woman. A subscription of thirty guineas at one payment, constitutes the
subscriber a Governor for life, with the last mentioned privileges.
Contributions of lesser sums than three guineas _per annum_ are
thankfully received, and intitle the contributors to recommend one sick
or lame in-patient, and one out-patient at the same time.

A committee of the Governors (appointed quarterly) meet at the hospital
every Tuesday, at ten of the clock, to receive and discharge patients,
and to transact the other necessary business of the house; where every
Governor, though not of the committee, has a right to be present, and
his attendance is received as a favour. A report of their proceedings is
made to the general court held every quarter, when the resolutions of
this committee are approved or rejected.

The patients are attended without fee or reward by three eminent
Physicians, a Man-midwife, three Surgeons, and a reverend Divine.

The Physicians visit the patients every Tuesday, Thursday, and Saturday,
and on intermediate days, when particular cases require it. The Surgeons
attend every day.

Patients are admitted on a letter of recommendation from a Governor or
Contributor, who may recommend in-patients, and have out-patients on the
books, according to the regulation abovementioned: and when in-patients
are recommended, and there is not room in the house to receive them,
they are put on the list to be admitted on the first vacancy, and in the
mean time are prescribed for as out-patients.

No security is required for burials.

All accidents are admitted without recommendation.

Tuesday being the day appointed for the admission of patients, they are
expected to be at the hospital, with their recommendations, at ten of
the clock.

The Physicians and Surgeons meet every Saturday at twelve of the clock,
at the hospital, where they give advice _gratis_ to all such diseased
poor who shall come, though unrecommended, and require it.

Married women only are admitted (in the last month of their pregnancy)
after they have been examined by the weekly board, and on their
producing an affidavit made before a Justice of the peace, of the time
and place of their marriage, and of the settlement of the husband, with
the manner the said settlement was obtained, whether by birth,
servitude, or otherwise. And that this useful branch of the charity, the
midwifery ward, may be made every way beneficial, and not liable to any
objection, no pupils will be admitted; the whole being under the
direction of Dr. Brudenell Exton, Physician and Man-midwife: and no
woman whatsoever, who has been able to prove her marriage, and her
husband’s settlement, so as to avoid burthening the parish wherein the
hospital stands, has been refused admittance.

The number of beds at present are sixty-four.

The patients admitted from the first institution of this hospital, in
August 1745, to the 1st of June 1758, are as follow:

                    In-patients, sick and lame  1829
                    Out-patients               11785
                    Lying-in women              1425
                                               —————
                                               15039

The servants of the house are forbid to take any gratuity of the
patients or their friends, on any pretence whatsoever, on pain of
expulsion.

Such persons who are inclined to favour this charitable design, are
desired to send their subscriptions, with their names and places of
abode, to the Treasurers, at the weekly committee, held every Tuesday in
the forenoon at the hospital; and in order to supply the current expence
of this charity, the subscribers are requested to continue to pay their
yearly subscriptions in advance.

Subscriptions and benefactions are likewise taken in at Messrs.
Honywood, Fuller, and Co. bankers in Birchin lane; and at Mr. Gislingham
Cooper’s, banker in the Strand. _From the account published by the
Society in June 1758._

The reader may find the other hospitals for lying-in women, founded
after the example set by this excellent charity, under the articles
LONDON LYING-IN HOSPITAL, LYING-IN HOSPITAL in Brownlow street, and
LYING-IN HOSPITAL in Duke street.


MIDDLESEX _row_, St. Giles’s Broadway.


MIDLEY’S _wharf_, Ratcliff.†


MILBORNE’S _Almshouse_, on the west side of Woodrof lane, Crutched
Friars, was erected by Sir John Milborne in the year 1535, for the
reception of thirteen poor members of the Drapers company, whom he
allowed 7d. _per_ week, which was at that time a sufficient support. In
the front of the building is the following inscription:

  _Ad laudem_ Dei, _& gloriosæ_ Virginis Mariæ, _hoc opus erexit
    Dominus_ Johannes Milborne, _Miles & Alderman. bujus civitatis, A.
    D. 1535_.

                                That is,

  ‘To the praise of God, and the glory of the Virgin, this edifice was
    erected by John Milborne, Mayor of this city in the year 1535.’

The Drapers company, to whom the management of this almshouse was
intrusted, have not only increased the number of the pensioners to
fifteen; but have doubled their pensions, with a load of coals, and
twenty or more shillings annually, out of the money left to be
distributed by that company at discretion.


_St._ MILDRED’S BREAD STREET, a church situated on the east side of
Bread street, and in the ward of that name, is thus denominated from its
being dedicated to St. Mildred, a Saxon lady, the daughter of Merwaldus,
brother to Penda King of the Mercians. This Princess despising the
gaieties of a court, retired to a convent at Hale in France, whence
returning to England, accompanied by seventy virgins, she was
consecrated Abbess of a new monastery in the isle of Thanet, where she
died in the year 676.

A church under the same tutelary name stood in that spot in the year
1333: but the last structure being destroyed by the fire of London, the
present edifice was created in its room in 1670.

It consists of a spacious body, and a light tower divided into four
stages, whence rises a tall spire.

The advowson of this church was anciently in the Prior and Canons of St.
Mary Overie’s, but it afterwards came to Sir Nicholas Crispe, in whose
family it may perhaps still remain. On the present edifice being built,
the parish of St. Margaret Moses was annexed to it. The Rector, besides
his other profits, receives 130l. _per annum_ in lieu of tithes.


_St._ MILDRED’S POULTRY, at the corner of Scalding alley, in Cheap ward.
A church of the same name stood in this place before the year 1325; but
the last edifice sharing the fate of most of the other public buildings
at the fire of London, this was built in its room.

It is a plain, substantial stone building, enlightened by a series of
large windows, and strengthened with rustic at the corners. The tower is
crowned with a plain course, without either pinacles, turret, or any
other ornament.

The patronage of this church was in the Prior and Canons of St. Mary
Overie’s in Southwark, till their suppression; and it has ever since
been in the King’s gift. After its being rebuilt, the parish of St. Mary
Cole was annexed to it, by which the profits of the Rector were
considerably increased. Besides his other profits, he receives 170l. a
year in lieu of tithes.


MILE END, so called from its being a mile from Aldgate, is situated near
Stepney, in the road to Bow. Here anciently stood a Lazaretto, or
hospital of lepers, denominated the house of our Saviour Jesus Christ,
and Mary Magdalene, to whom Edward VI. granted letters patent, allowing
them to beg for their support.


MILE END GREEN, Stepney.


MILE END OLD TOWN, near Stepney.


MILE’S _lane_, 1. By Crooked lane. † 2. New Fish street.†


MILE’S _rents_, 1. Dog lane, Barnaby street. † 2. Powell’s alley, Beech
lane, Whitecross street.†


MILFORD _lane_, extends from the Strand to the Thames.†


MILFORD _stairs_, at the bottom of Milford lane. †


MILITARY _mews_, Prince’s street, Soho.


MILK _alley_, 1. Dean street, Soho. 2. Long Ditch, Westminster. 3. Milk
yard, near Gravel lane. 4. Peter street, Clare market. 5. Wapping. 6.
Winchester yard, Winchester street.


MILK _street_, Cheapside; so called from a market for milk formerly kept
there.


MILK _yard_, 1. New Gravel lane, Shadwell. 2. Popping’s alley, Fleet
street. 3. Rag Fair, Rosemary lane.


MILLBANK, Westminster horse ferry.


MILLER’S _court_, Aldermanbury.†


MILL _lane_, Tooley street.


MILLMAN’S _street_, near Red Lion street, Holborn.†


MILLPOND BRIDGE, Rotherhith.


MILLPOND BRIDGE _lane_, Rotherhith.


MILLPOND _row_, Rotherhith.


MILL _street_, 1. Conduit street. 2. Rotherhith wall. 3. St. Saviour’s
dock.


MILL _yard_, runs from Rosemary lane into Goodman’s fields.


MILLS’S _yard_, Rotherhith wall.†


MILXAN’S _wharf_, Durham yard.†


MIMS, there are two villages of this name; North Mims, situated in
Hertfordshire, on the east side of Colney, and two miles from Hatfield.
In its neighbourhood is the seat of the late Sir Joseph Jekyll, Master
of the Rolls, in right of his Lady, who was heir to her late brother the
great Lord Somers. It has a most delightful prospect. The body of that
Nobleman lies interred in the chancel of the church, without any
inscription. This seat now belongs to the Duke of Leeds, who is Lord of
the manor.

South Mims is situated two miles from the former, in the most northern
corner of Middlesex. Here is an almshouse built and endowed for six poor
people, by James Hickson, Esq; who died in 1689, when he gave by his
will to fifteen poor people of this parish two shifts, one pair of hose,
and a pair of shoes annually; for the payment of these, and other
benefactions, he left several estates in this parish to the Brewers
company in London.


MINCING _lane_, on the south side of Fenchurch street, extends to Tower
street, is well built, and chiefly inhabited by merchants.


MINE AND BATTERY WORKS COMPANY, for the discovery of mines and minerals.
In order to give a just idea of the origin of this and the following
company, it is necessary to observe, that the English, in the reign of
Queen Elizabeth, being but little acquainted with the manner of working
and discovering mines, she, by the advice of her Council, sent for
several Germans, well skilled both in these works, and in smelting and
refining of minerals; who on their arrival were no sooner naturalized,
than they obtained a licence to search for mines.

Among these, that Princess in the year 1565, impowered William Humfreys
and Christopher Schutz a German, to search for all mines, minerals, and
subterraneous treasure, except allum and copperas, in the several
royalties throughout England, exclusive of the following eight counties,
York, Cumberland, Westmoreland, Cornwall, Lancashire, Devon, Gloucester,
and the principality of Wales, for their sole use and profit; her
Majesty only reserving to herself a tenth part of all gold, silver, and
quicksilver ores, and the pre-emption of refined gold and silver, the
former at 8d. and the latter at 1d. _per_ ounce lower than the current
price of those metals; and 6d. for every hundred weight of copper.

Afterwards her Majesty, in the year 1568, incorporated this society by
the name of, _The Governors, Assistants, and Society of the Mineral and
Battery Works_. The number of shares belonging to this company at first
amounted to thirty-six; which being divided into half and quarter parts,
they are at present increased to an hundred and forty four.


MINES ROYAL COMPANY. This society owed its origin to the same cause as
the former, and was founded a year before it: for in 1564 Queen
Elizabeth, by her letters patent granted to Thomas Thurland and Daniel
Houghsetter, and their heirs for ever, impowered them to search for
mines of gold, silver, copper, and quicksilver, in the several royalties
in the counties of York, Lancashire, Cumberland, Westmoreland, Cornwall,
Devon, Gloucester, Worcester, and the principality of Wales, to be held
of the crown upon the same terms as those abovementioned, with respect
to the Mine and Battery Works company.

At length Thurland and Houghsetter having in virtue of the powers
granted them, sold several parts or shares of their said privileges,
they, with the purchasers, were, by letters patent, dated the 22d of May
1568, incorporated by the stile of, _The Governors, Assistants, and
Commonalty of the Mines Royal_. The shares of this company at first
consisted of twenty-four; but they have since been increased to
ninety-six. _Sir John Pettus’s Fodinæ Regale._


MINORIES. This street extends from Aldgate street to Tower hill. The
middle part of the east side is called the Little Minories; this part is
railed in, and is out of the liberties of the city. Here anciently stood
an abbey of nuns of the order of St. Clare, called the Minoresses;
whence the street obtained the name of the Minories. See the article
TRINITY _in the Minories_.


MINT, an office kept in the Tower for coining money. Before the Norman
conquest the Kings of England set apart certain monasteries for mints;
presuming that the coinage would in those places be best secured from
frauds and corruption. Edward I. however ordered a mint of thirty
furnaces to be erected in the Tower of London, and others in Canterbury,
Kingston upon Hull, Newcastle upon Tyne, Bristol and Exeter. From that
time the mint was kept sometimes in one place, and sometimes in another,
according to the will and pleasure of the Prince, who, for a sum of
money, was frequently prevailed upon to grant the privilege of coining
to some Nobleman, Bishop, or Corporation; which being attended with many
inconveniencies to the public, Queen Elizabeth, in the beginning of her
reign, endeavoured to rectify those abuses, by confining the mint to the
Tower of London, which has ever since been appropriated to the coinage
of money, except when King Charles I. by the confusion of the times, was
obliged to erect new mints at Oxford, York, and Newark upon Trent, where
being with his army, he was reduced to the necessity of coining money to
supply his present wants: and when King William III. having called in
all the base and clipped money, for the sake of expedition, and for the
service of distant parts of the nation, was obliged to erect mints at
Bristol, Exeter, York and Winchester.

The mint office is on the left hand on entering into the Tower, and at a
small distance from the gate. There is no possibility of describing the
particular processes that the different metals undergo before they
receive the impression.

The manner of stamping is all you are permitted to see, and this is done
with surprizing expedition, by means of an engine, worked sometimes by
three, and sometimes by four men. The manner of making the impression on
gold, silver, and copper, is exactly the same, only a little more care
is necessary in the one, than in the other, to prevent waste.

This engine, which makes the impression on both sides of a piece of
money, in the same moment, works by a worm-screw terminating in a
spindle; just in the same manner as the letter press for printing books.
To the point of this spindle the head of the die is fastened by a small
screw, and in a little sort of a cup directly underneath it, is placed
the reverse. Between these the piece of metal already cut round, or cast
to the size, and if gold, exactly weighed, is placed; and by once
pulling down the spindle with a jerk, is completely stamped. The whole
process is performed with amazing dexterity; for as fast as the men who
work the engine can turn the spindle, so fast does another twitch out
with his middle finger that which was stamped, while with his finger and
thumb he places another that is unstamped. The silver and gold thus
stamped, are delivered to be milled round the edges, the manner of
performing which is a secret never shewn to any body.

The mint is managed by several officers formed into a corporation. These
are a Warden, a Master and Worker, a Comptroller, the King’s Assay
Master, the chief Engraver, the Surveyor of the meltings, a Clerk of the
irons, a Weigher and Teller, a Provost, Melters, Blanchers, Moneyers,
&c.

The Warden receives the silver, &c. from the goldsmiths, pays for it,
and oversees all that belong to his office. His salary amounts to 450l.
a year for himself and clerk. He has also another clerk who receives
100l. a year.

The Master and Worker receives the silver, &c. from the Warden, orders
it to be melted, delivers it to the Moniers, and receives it back from
them again. His salary is 650l. a year for himself and three clerks.

The Comptroller sees that the money be made of the just assize; oversees
the officers, and controlls them, if the money does not prove as it
ought. His salary for himself and clerk is 535l. _per annum_.

The King’s Assay Master, takes care that the bullion is according to
standard. He has a salary of 225l. a year for himself and clerk: and the
Assistant Assay Master has 100l. _per annum_.

The chief Engraver, engraves the stamps for the money. He has a salary
of 200l. a year, and his Assistant 80l.

The Surveyor of the meltings, is to see the bullion cast out, and that
the metal be not altered after the Assay Master has made trial of it,
and it is delivered to the melter.

The business of the Clerk of the irons, is to see that the working irons
are kept clean, and fit for the work. These two last offices are
frequently enjoyed by the same person, who has a salary of 130l. 10s. a
year.

The Weigher weighs the bullion.

The Teller counts the number of pieces. These two last offices are also
frequently enjoyed by the same person, who has a salary of 142l. 10s. a
year for himself and clerk.

The Provost to the company of Moneyers, provides for all the Moneyers,
and oversees them. His salary is 100l. a year.

The Moneyers cast the money, and sheer it; some beat it broad, others
round it, and others stamp or coin it. These have 40l. a year each.

Besides these there are the King’s Clerk, and Clerk of the papers, who
has 100l. a year; a Surveyor of the money presses, who has 40l. a year;
and several deputies and clerks.


MINT, opposite the west end of St. George’s church, Southwark. Here
anciently stood a magnificent structure belonging to the Duke of
Suffolk, which coming to Henry VIII. he erected a mint in it, from which
that neighbourhood is still denominated. This place was for many years a
famous asylum for debtors, who fled thither with their effects, in order
to defraud their creditors: till this was carried to such a height, that
the Parliament found it necessary to take away the privilege of
sanctuary in order to destroy this nest of spoilers.


MINT _street_, extends west from the corner of Blackman street, opposite
St. George’s church, Southwark.


MINT _square_, in the Mint, Southwark.


MITCHELL’S _court_, 1. Milk street, Cheapside† 2. Mitchell street, Old
street.†


MITCHELL’S _street_, Brick lane, Old street.†


MITRE _court_, 1. Cheapside.* 2. Cornhill.* 3. Fenchurch street.* 4.
Fish street hill.* 5. Fleet street.* 6. Friday street.* 7. Gutter lane,
Cheapside.* 8. High street, Aldgate.* 9. St. John’s street, West
Smithfield.* 10. Milk street, Cheapside.* 11. St. Paul’s Church yard.*


MITRE _court buildings_, Inner Temple.*


MITRE _yard_, Shoemaker row, Aldgate.*


MOLDSTRAND DOCK _stairs_, Willow street, Bank side.


MOLIN’S _court_, Shoe lane, Fleet street.†


MONEYBAG _alley_, Blue Anchor yard, Rosemary lane.


MONEYBAG _yard_, Anchor alley.


MONEY _court_, Mile’s lane.


MONGER’S _Almshouse_, in Well street, Hackney, was founded by Henry
Monger, Esq; in the year 1699, for six poor old men, who are allowed
forty shillings _per annum_ each. _Maitland._


MONKWELL _street_, Silver street, near Cripplegate. It took its name
from the monks lodging in it, and a well belonging to them. _Maitland._


MONMOUTH _court_, 1. Hedge lane, Charing Cross. 2. High Holborn. 3.
Monmouth street, St. Giles’s.


MONMOUTH _street_, 1. Quaker street, Spitalfields. 2. Seven Dials. This
street is famous for the sale of old cloaths. 3. Shadwell market. 4.
Spitalfields.


MONTAGUE _alley_, Clare street, Clare market.


MONTAGUE _close_, in Southwark.


MONTAGUE _court_, 1. Bishopsgate street. 2. Little Britain. 3. Montague
street, Spitalfields. 4. Petticoat lane.


MONTAGUE HOUSE, in Great Russel street, a noble building, with a very
spacious court yard before it. His Grace the late Duke of Montague
having built another house in the Privy Garden at Whitehall, this
edifice was let for the use of the King’s great wardrobe, and is since
purchased by authority of Parliament, to be a repository for the Cotton
library, and for the natural and artificial curiosities, medals, coins,
printed books, and manuscripts, bought by the public of the executors of
the late Sir Hans Sloane, the late Lord Oxford, &c. _Stowe’s Survey,
last edition._ See the article BRITISH MUSEUM.


MONTAGUE _street_, Brick lane, Spitalfields.


MONTH’S _alley_, St. Catharine’s lane.




                    _The End of the_ FOURTH VOLUME.

------------------------------------------------------------------------




                          TRANSCRIBER’S NOTES


 1. P. 112, changed “pent-houses” to “pest-houses”.
 2. P. 310, changed “Town Clerk, &c. their several coaches” to “Town
      Clerk, &c. in their several coaches”.
 3. All spelling errors were left uncorrected.
 4. Enclosed italics font in _underscores_.
 5. Superscripts are denoted by a caret before a single superscript
      character, e.g. M^r.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of London and Its Environs Described,
Vol. 4 (of 6), by Anonymous

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK LONDON AND ITS ENVIRONS, VOL 4 ***

***** This file should be named 61127-0.txt or 61127-0.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/6/1/1/2/61127/

Produced by Richard Tonsing and The Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by The
Internet Archive)

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks, unless you receive
specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of this
eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this eBook
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports,
performances and research. They may be modified and printed and given
away--you may do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks
not protected by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the
trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country outside the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you'll have to check the laws of the country where you
  are located before using this ebook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and The
Project Gutenberg Trademark LLC, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org



Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is in Fairbanks, Alaska, with the
mailing address: PO Box 750175, Fairbanks, AK 99775, but its
volunteers and employees are scattered throughout numerous
locations. Its business office is located at 809 North 1500 West, Salt
Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up to
date contact information can be found at the Foundation's web site and
official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:

    Dr. Gregory B. Newby
    Chief Executive and Director
    gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

